--- Page 1 ---
Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111
September
www.deswater.com
doi: 10.5004/dwt.2020.25993
Calculation of greenhouse gas emissions in Canary Islands wastewater
treatment plants
B. Del Río-Gamero*, S.O. Perez-Baez, A. Gómez Gotor
Department of Process Engineering, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Campus de Tafira Baja, 35017, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,
Spain; Tel. + 34-928.454.582; emails: beatriz.delrio@ulpgc.es (B. D. Río-Gamero), sebastianovidio.perez@ulpgc.es (S.O. Perez-Baez),
antonio.gomezgotor@ulpgc.es (A. Gómez Gotor)
Received 14 August 2019; Accepted 17 April 2020
abstract
This research analyzes the water-energy nexus contribution to climate change from the integral
water cycle perspective. A prior analysis of the sectors involved in global warming showed that
clear water/energy interdependence was a crucial factor in increasing greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions. Although the analysis of water consumption in the energy sector has been widely stud-
ied, global requirements of energy for water are still poorly understood as is their contribution
to climate change. With this in mind, wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) were chosen for the
specific analysis conducted in the present study as they are one of the biggest GHG emitters in
the water industry. They are located in the Canary Islands (Spain), an archipelago that, like many
others, is characterized by its dependence on external water and energy resources. The methodol-
ogy employed involved an initial analysis of the WWTPs in the islands and the selection of four
full-scale WWTPs of varying capacity for further in-depth analysis. This was followed by consid-
eration of the different protocols and tools that can be used to quantify direct and indirect GHGs
emissions. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change protocol was selected due to the great
diversity of operational data and the emission factors proposed by experts when the data are not
available for a specific region under analysis. The results show that the highest emission source is
due to energy consumption (ranging from 165 to 2,716 Tm CO/y for the smallest and largest size
eq 2
WWTPs, respectively). To solve the problem, the introduction of renewable energies is presented as
a feasible and attractive option due to the specific characteristics of the analyzed territory. Likewise,
the use of sludge as an internal energy resource (in anaerobic digestion) obviates the need for its
transport and management, contributing to the circular technology and reducing emissions.
Keywords: Wastewater treatment plants; Greenhouse gas emissions; Global warming; Direct/indirect
emissions; Climate change
1. Introduction with a view to limiting and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions [2–8].
Climate change is no longer considered a possibil-
From an ecological perspective, measures such as affor-
ity, but rather a reality caused largely by the human-
estation and sustainable agricultural intensification are
kind. Anthropogenic-induced warming has resulted in an
being promoted as ways to ensure food production without
increase in the global mean temperature of approximately
compromising the Paris agreement on climate targets [2].
1°C compared to pre-industrial levels [1]. Innumerable
However, it should be borne in mind that urban trees are
research studies and policy changes in a wide range of fields
also affected by the harsher conditions found in urban envi-
(industrial, social, ecological, etc.) have been carried out
ronments [3] and that agriculture systems in different parts
* Corresponding author.
1944-3994/1944-3986 © 2020 Desalination Publications. All rights reserved.

--- Page 2 ---
102 B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111
of the world need to be managed in accordance with the The water cycle is an important player in global
specificities of each ecosystem [4]. Similarly, when consider- warming. This work focuses specifically on the water cycle
ing ways to limit climate change from a social perspective, a in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), a major GHG
place-based approach can be useful to analyze the abstract emitter which produces 56% of GHG emissions in the
entity of climate change as a whole or classified by its differ- water industry [16].
ent independent sources [5,6]. It was decided to use island regions as the scenario for
There is no doubt that the industrial sector is leading this study given the problem of water/energy interdepen-
GHG emitter. With this in mind, Wang and Feng [7] devel- dency they typically have to deal with. This is the case of
oped a decomposition framework which was used to quan- the Canary Islands (Fig. 1). This archipelago is one of the
tify the impacts of both oriented technologies and economic seventeen autonomous communities of Spain [17,18] and the
factors on CO emissions in China. Their results highlighted southernmost region in the country. It has been granted spe-
2
investment scale expansion as the leading factor in pro- cial status by the EU as one of it is nine outermost regions
moting the growth of emissions and confirmed the need to [19,20].
keep improving the energy structure to reduce emissions Located in the transitioning area between the temperate
[7]. In another study, which aimed to develop a low-carbon and tropical zones, the climate in the islands is character-
scenario for the energy sector in less developed countries ized by very scarce and irregular precipitations [21]. In some
such as Brazil, it was again reported how the increase in cases, this can mean a shortfall of as much as 90% in terms of
energy consumption was a crucial factor in CO emissions water requirements [22]. One way to quantify the problem
2
[5]. As far as Europe is concerned, while a lot of the research that this can generate is to compare the significant differ-
undertaken has focused on a similar transformation of the ence between the water capital of a resident in the islands
energy sector, it has also been reported that there has been a (20 m3/inhabitant/y) with that of a resident on the Spanish
systematic overestimation in the literature of the consequent mainland (2,470 m3/inhabitant/y) [23]. The major social con-
costs of the transition to a low carbon scenario [8]. cern of water scarcity is further exacerbated by the growing
Despite these problems, the goal of finding ways to demand for an increase in life quality [24] and an expected
reduce GHG emissions is one that must necessarily con- rise in population which will shortly mean the need to guar-
tinue. One way to contribute to achieving this goal is to antee domestic water supply for an estimated 2,150,000
identify, analyze, and quantify the main emission points. inhabitants [22].
Such research requires an understanding of the complicated This problem has made the Canary Islands pioneers in
scenario inherent to the management of water and energy, satisfying demand with innovative techniques for water
two essential resources for life that have been the focus of the production [25]. However, in a territory characterized by its
World Energy Outlook (WEO) since 2016 [9]. The processes external energy dependence, water production plants tend
involved in water and energy generation and the intrinsic to require high levels of energy consumption as a result
relationship between them are vital factors that need to be of the technologies used in the desalination and wastewa-
considered in a world of climate change. ter treatment processes [26]. Almost inevitably, this high
Water consumption in the energy sector has been widely energy consumption increases the carbon footprint of
studied [10,11]. Most studies have prioritized the analysis the islands [27,28].
of an energy transition in which fossil fuels give way to This work focuses on an analysis of the contribution to
renewable technologies in terms of cost [12], GHG emis- global warming by WWTPs. After identifying the problem,
sions reduction [13], and manufacturing and storage capac- the main objective is to provide a numerical value for its
ity [14]. In all of these cases, water consumption is a crucial quantification. To do so, an evaluation is made of the dif-
factor. However, global requirements of energy for water ferent sources of GHG emissions of the WWTPs. These
are still poorly understood, which may result in biases in trouble spots are differentiated according to whether the
projections and consequently in policies adopted for its emissions are direct (produced by the different processes
management [15]. and equipment of the plant itself, as well as the sludge that
Fig. 1. Location of the Canary Islands.

--- Page 3 ---
B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111 103
it generates) or indirect (not produced directly through the Given the heterogeneity of the WWTPs and the territo-
mechanisms and equipment of the plant) [29]. rial fragmentation of the Canary Islands, it was decided to
This framework gives us a starting point to restruc- evaluate one plant for each of the four established ranges
ture the management of water resources in the Canary in order to guarantee reliable results. The four plants are
Islands, underlining the importance of the water-energy- chosen (representative of each range) are shown in Fig. 2.
environment nexus and the need to apply optimizations
and improvements in both the water and energy sector.
2.2. Protocol selection for calculating the GHG emissions
The global concern about the adverse effects and conse-
2. Methodology
quences of climate change [32] has triggered the develop-
The methodology used in this research work can be ment of various strategies to mitigate this change. Examples
divided into three subsections: include the National Roadmap 2020 [33], Europe 2020
(the growth strategy) at the European level [34], and the
• Subsection 2.1: WWTPs analysis guidelines set out in the “Mitigation Change 2014” document
• Subsection 2.2: protocol selection for calculating GHG prepared by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
emissions (IPCC) [35].
• Subsection 2.3: data calculation With regard to the application methodologies for the
quantification of GHG emissions (web-based platform,
software tools, etc.), they are few in comparison with the
2.1. WWTPs analysis
regulations provided for them. There are two types of
In accordance with Directive 91/271/EC, since December methodologies classified respectively as top-down and bot-
31 of 2005, any urban nucleus with a population of between tom-up. The difference between them lies in the strategy of
2,000 and 15,000 inhabitants has been required to have a information processing and knowledge ordering. The top-
collector system and a wastewater treatment process [30]. down methodology firstly considers the overall picture and
As a result, the number of WWTPs has increased in the dif- is then broken down into smaller segments. Unit indicators
ferent islands, causing a consequent decentralization of the are commonly analyzed, while, a detailed analysis of indi-
treatment system [31]. vidual devices is less often performed. In the bottom-up
Due to the wide range of WWTP sizes found in all the methodologies, the individual base parameters of the sys-
islands, a characterization procedure was established based tem are first specified in detail and then linked together to
on the treated water capacity. The range limits were estab- form a complex system [36]. In this context, the difficulties
lished in a previous statistical survey which provided the in obtaining detailed data from the WWTPs considered
various mode values. The classification ranges are shown in in the present study suggested that a top-down methodo-
Table 1. logical approach was the most appropriate for this work.
The 142 WWTPs in the islands were classified in this way Due to the lack of established procedures at the regional
at both island and archipelago level in order to evaluate their level, the calculations of GHG emissions for this study
distribution throughout the region. were based on operational data and emission factors, using
the protocol stipulated by the IPCC. This protocol was
selected on the basis of a previous discussion about various
Table 1 possible tools derived mainly on the basis of four method-
WWTP classification ologies. Table 2 shows these methodologies and their main
advantages and disadvantages.
WWTP Capacity (m3/d) The IPCC methodology lays the foundation for most
of the aforementioned documents and consists of a great
Very small <1,000
diversity of values and technical data evaluated by expert
Small 1,000–5,000
commissions. These data values are particularly necessary
Medium 5,000–10,000
for application in the Canary Islands because of the absence
Big >10,000
of any information on this sector in the local territory.
Fig. 2. WWTP selection.

--- Page 4 ---
104 B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111
Table 2
Methodologies used to calculate GHG emissions.
Methodology Advantages Disadvantages
Top-down methodology
Free access and easy to use IPCC and USEPA approaches
LGOa It provides several forms of calculation that allow it Standardized set of guidelines to assist US local govern-
to be more precise depending on the availability of ments
site-specific data
Different levels of data requirements, rigor and
National and state-level estimations using IPCC basis
USEPAb accuracy
More appropriate method for the state of California
Free access and easy to use
Methodology follows the IPCC guidelines and the IPCC
Top-down methodology good practice guidance
NERIc
Free access and easy to use It does not provide a default operating database
Country-specific data on the emission factor for direct NO
2
Internationally recognized
Basis for subsequent protocols
IPCCd Top-down methodology Does not use facility-specific information
Designed for macroscale evaluations
Great contribution of revised data
Adapted from [37–41].
aLocal Governments Operations protocol (USA and Canada).
bUnited States Environmental Protection Agency. Wastewater treatment methodology.
cNational Environmental Research Institute of Denmark methodology.
dIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change protocol.
The other methodologies mostly try to use local/state Table 3
data and sometimes modify some of the equations based WWTP energy consumption
on-site regulations to improve the accuracy of the calculation.
To better understand the evolution of a methodology, the WWTP Capacity (m3/y) Energy consumption (kWh/y)
work prepared by the California wastewater climate change
Sureste 4,380,000 3,349,255
group and Bay area clean water agencies in 2007 provides a
Jinámar 3,650,000 1,554,719
detailed analysis of the differences between the United States
Tazacorte 547,500 164,079
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and IPCC meth-
odologies [42]. P. Hidalgo 232,140 203,632
2.3. Data calculation
analysis was conducted of the distance between the two loca-
For the purposes of this study, direct and indirect emis- tions, truck engine capacities, type of journey, and the num-
sions were considered separately [43]. ber of days of sludge removal [49]. Table 4 shows the distance
traveled for each of the selected plants.
2.3.1. Indirect emissions
2.3.2. Direct emissions
The main factor that needs to be considered is inten-
sive energy consumption [44]. Conventional electricity, in The direct emissions were classified into two clearly
most cases, is produced through an energy mix in which differentiated subdivisions. One considers the different
fossil fuels predominate [45], causing GHG emissions in processes used in treating the water, while the other corre-
the power plant that generates it [46]. To carry out this cal- sponds to the emissions of the sludge itself [50].
culation, carbon dioxide emission factors and transition
coefficients to primary energy, provided by the Spanish
2.3.2.1. Treatment process emissions
Institute for Energy Diversification and Saving were
used [47]. Table 3 lists the treated wastewater treatment It should be noted that, within the components of the
capacities and the energy consumption necessary for plant carbon footprint that are part of the biogenic source, CO
2
operation. emissions were not included since they are considered part
The second indirect emission factor considered is related of the natural cycle [51]. CH and NO, as they have a greater
4 2
to the transport of sludge from the WWTP to the correspond- global warming potential, must be quantified [41]. Likewise,
ing biomethane plants or landfills [48]. For this purpose, an the null emission of these three components in the water

--- Page 5 ---
B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111 105
Table 4 or by incorporating the mean value of the corresponding
Distance traveled for sludge removal IPCC protocol.
NO emissions are associated with the degradation
2
WWTP Distance between locations (km) of nitrogenous components in wastewater, namely urea,
Sureste 33 nitrates, and proteins. In this study, the NO emissions
2
(kg NO/y) were determined through Eq. (2) [51].
Jinámar 25.7 2
Tazacorte 45
44
P. Hidalgo 60 N OEmissions=N ⋅EF ⋅ (2)
2 EFLUENT EFLUENT 28
The same procedure used for calculating methane emis-
collection process is confirmed, because the entire Canary
sions was used. The equation parameters are shown in
water collection is confined under the soil [52].
Table 6.
Anaerobic treatments produce higher emissions of these
compounds than aerobic treatments. In this respect, as cen-
tralized aerobic systems predominate in the archipelago, 2.3.2.2. Emissions from sewage sludge
GHG emissions should not be very noticeable. However,
Two separate calculations were made to determine
the Canary climate is within the temperature range that
the emissions from sewage sludge, one for the biodegrad-
favors methane production processes (>15°C). In addition,
able organic carbon and the other for the possible NO that
there are a large number of plants ending their service life. 2
remains and/or forms in the sludge.
These factors support the decision to calculate the emission
According to the IPCC protocol, in the domestic sludge
of methane and nitrous oxide.
sector, the biodegradable organic carbon content is about
The CH emission produced by anaerobic degradation
4 45% of the dry matter [53]. Using the data available and the
and its quantification is a function of the degradable organic
stoichiometric ratio in the oxidation reaction, the emission
matter content of the wastewater, as well as the temperature
value was obtained.
and type of treatment. Emissions of CH (kg CH/y) were
4 4 With respect to NO and considering the characteristics
determined through Eq. (1) [51]. 2
of the wastewater treatment in the islands applied in the
selected protocol [51], Eq. (3) was obtained, as follows [54].
 
CH 4Emissions= ∑ i,j( U i×T i,j×EF j) ( TOW−S)−R (1)
N 2O (L)−N=( F ON+F SOM)⋅Frac LIXIVIACION−(H)⋅EF (3)
5
The equation parameters are shown in Table 5. Data The conversion of NO –N emissions to NO emissions
2 (L) 2
values were either provided by the different WWTP owners was performed through Eq. (4).
Table 5
Parameters used in the calculation of CH emissions
4
Parameter Definition Data value Function
Fraction of population in Income group: rural, urban high income and urban low
U By default
i income group “i” income
Degree of the utilization of
treatment/discharge system, Income group: rural, urban high income and urban low
T By default
ij “j”, for each income group income
fraction “i”
“j” = each treatment/discharge pathway or system
Emission factor, (kg CH/
EF 4 B·MCF B = maximum CH producing capacity, (kg CH/kg BOD)
j kg BOD) 0 j 0 4 4
MCF = methane correction factor
j
P = country population, (person)
BOD = country-specific per capita BOD, (g/person/d)
Total organics in wastewater,
TOW P·BOD·0.001·I·365 0.001 = conversion from grams BOD to kg BOD
(kg BOD/y)
I = correction factor for additional industrial BOD
discharged into sewers (default value)
Organic component removed Value contributed by each
S Type of system
as sludge (kg BOD/y) plant
Amount of CH recovered, Not applicable in the
R 4 –
(kg CH/y) archipelago
4
Adapted from [51].

--- Page 6 ---
106 B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111
Table 6
Parameters used in the calculation of NO emissions
2
Parameter Definition Data value Function
EF Emission factor for By default –
EFLUENT
NO emissions from
2
discharged wastewater,
(kg NO–N/kg N]
2
N Nitrogen in the effluent (P·Protein· P = human population
EFLUENT
discharged to aquatic F ·F · Protein = annual per capita protein consumption, (kg/person/y)
NPR NON-CON
environments, (kg N/y) F ) − N F = fraction of nitrogen in protein, default = 0.16, (kg N/kg protein)
IND-COM SLUDGE NPR
F = factor for non-consumed protein added to the wastewater
NON-CON
F = factor for industrial and commercial co-discharged protein
IND-COM
into the sewer system
N = nitrogen removed with sludge (default = zero), (kg N/y)
SLUDGE
44/28 Conversion of kg – –
NO–N into kg NO
2 2
Adapted from [51].
plants are presented in percent terms in Fig. 4. To high-
44
N 2O (L)=N 2O (L)−N⋅ (4) light the input of smaller plants, in the first circle diagram
28
in Fig. 4 the percentage named “others” corresponds to
the sum of the small and very small plants, with their cor-
Table 7 shows the parameters used in Eq. (3). responding percentages broken down in the second circle
diagram to the right.
The distribution of the total treated wastewater
3. Results and discussion
volume by plant capacity range (Table 1) is shown in Fig. 4.
The various figures below synthesize the results that A more detailed analysis is found in Fig. 5, showing
were obtained in the analysis of the WWTPs in the Canary the number of WWTPs and their distribution according to
Islands. Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the treated wastewa- the capacity range classification (Table 1) for each island.
ter volume by island. At the same time, the 142 WWTPs of The number of plants with a capacity below 1,000 m3/d
the archipelago were classified based on the volume range accounts for more than 50% of the total number of plants. In
shown in Table 1. The big, medium, small, and very small terms of the installed capacity range, the number of plants
Table 7
Parameters used in the calculation of NOsludgeemissions
2
Parameter Definition Data value Function
Annual amount of NO–N produced from leaching and runoff
NO –N 2 – –
2 (L) of N additions (kg NO–N y–1)
2
Annual amount of sewage sludge and other organic N F = annual amount
SEW
F additions applied to soils in regions where leaching/runoff F = F of total sewage N that is
ON ON SEW
occurs, (kg N y–1) applied to soils, (kg N y–1)
Annual amount of N mineralized in mineral soils associ-
ated with loss of soil C from soil organic matter as a result Not competent in the archi-
F Null value
SOM of changes to land use or management in regions where pelago
leaching/runoff occurs, (kg N y–1)
Fraction of all N added to/mineralized in managed soils
Frac in regions where it is lost through leaching and runoff, By default Calculated by experts
LIXIVIACIÓN–(H)
[kg N (kg of N additions)–1]
Emission factor for NO emissions from N leaching and
EF 2 By default Calculated by experts
5 runoff, [kg NO–N (kg N leached)–1]
2
NO NO emissions from leaching and runoff – –
2 (L) 2
Adapted from [54].

--- Page 7 ---
B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111 107
the installed capacity covers considerably more than the
actual number of inhabitants. This is due to the oversizing
caused by holiday resorts where the tourist sector doubles
the number of inhabitants [55]. On the other hand, the more
rural islands (La Palma, La Gomera) manage to reach the
equilibrium of the inhabitant/ treated wastewater ratio
with other kinds of wastewater treatment systems like filter
wells or septic tanks, which are usually located in the most
decentralized areas [56,57].
For the evaluation of GHG emissions, the following sub-
sections provide the results obtained from the four plants
under study expressed in equivalent annual metric tons of
Fig. 3. Treated wastewater volume distribution in the Canary carbon dioxide (Tm CO/y) for purposes of comparison
eq 2
Islands (m3/d). [41]. Global warming potential conversion factors should be
used for the respective components that make up the GHGs
emitted by the WWTPs.
The results are classified according to the type of emis-
sion (direct or indirect) and the component of the emissions.
3.1. Indirect emissions
Energy consumption is the largest indirect emitter ana-
lyzed. As the vast majority of the WWTPs operate with aer-
obic secondary biological treatments, the most important
factors are the pumping and aeration systems. The robust
equipment required for the smallest WWTPs to operate
results in them having a relatively high energy consump-
tion (Table 8). Table 9 shows the relationship between energy
consumption and treated wastewater volume.
With respect to transport emissions, the distance between
Fig. 4. Distribution of treated wastewater volume by plant
the treatment plant and the landfill or sludge treatment area
capacity range (%).
(Table 4) clearly has an important impact. Although sludge
transport emissions are low in comparison to energy con-
built is inversely proportional to their size. The low num- sumption emissions, they are a concern because of the
ber of big plants (capacity > 10,000 m3/d), located in the two increasing need for WWTP installation in smaller urban
provincial capital islands (Gran Canaria and Tenerife) which centers.
are characterized by larger population centers, is due to
the implementation of the previously mentioned Directive
3.2. Direct emissions
91/271/EC [30].
Fig. 6 compares the number of inhabitants in each island The results of direct emissions of CH and NO are shown
4 2
with the theoretical number of people with access to waste- in Table 10. Although the WWTPs use aerobic treatments,
water sanitation according to the total installed wastewater methane emissions are confirmed in all plant sizes, con-
treatment capacity. As can be seen, in some of the islands firming the major influence of the climatic conditions (high
Fig. 5. Canary Islands WWTPs distribution.

--- Page 8 ---
108 B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111
Fig. 6. Access to wastewater sanitation.
Table 8 Table 9
Indirect emissions The ratio between treated wastewater volume and energy
consumption (kWh/m3) of the WWTP case studies
Energy consumption Sludge transport
WWTP WWTP Volume Energy consumption Ratio
emissions (Tm CO/y) emissions (Tm CO/y)
eq 2 eq 2
(m3/y) (kWh/y) (kWh/m3)
Sureste 2,716 4
Sureste 4,380,000 3,349,255 0.76
Jinámar 1,259 3
Jinámar 3,650,000 1,554,719 0.42
Tazacorte 133 5
Tazacorte 547,500 164,079 0.30
P. Hidalgo 165 7
P. Hidalgo 232,140 203,632 0.87
temperature) in the islands. The degree of NO emissions
2
tends to vary due to the installation of de-nitrification pro- Table 10
cesses in some plants. Direct quantified emissions
Finally, emissions from sludge biodegradation, whether
in landfills or in confined spaces, have in most cases low val- Treatment process emissions
ues (Table 10). However, when the total amount of sludge
WWTP CH (Tm CO/y) NO emissions (Tm CO/y)
produced in all the WWTPs is considered, as well as the 4 eq 2 2 eq 2
corresponding sludge transport emissions, the result- Sureste 10,801 1,479
ing value would be a concern. In addition, the European Jinámar 4,980 4,624
Parliament has called for the progressive banning of landfills
Tazacorte 13 9
before 2020 [58].
P. Hidalgo 82 55
Sewage sludge emissions
3.3. Total emissions
WWTPs BOC emissions NO emissions (Tm CO/y)
Table 11 summarizes the emissions of the four plants 2 eq 2
(Tm CO/y)
used as case studies. As is widely known, no wastewater eq 2
treatment plant can carry out its operation without emit- Sureste 9 48
ting GHGs. However, the quantification of these emissions Jinámar 6 32
allows the problem to be considered in a tangible and real Tazacorte – –
way. If the analysis is extended to cover the total emissions
P. Hidalgo – 1.7
produced by a plant over its average useful life (25 y), the
resulting values are alarming. As an example, and based
on the values shown in Table 11, the smallest and larg- While there are several ways to reduce these emis-
est size WWTPs considered in this study would emit an sions, for the Canary Islands an increased use of renew-
estimated total of 7,767 and 446,975 Tm CO, respectively. able energy sources (RES) is a feasible and very attractive
eq 2
Fig. 7 shows how the respective percentages of direct option. The islands are excellently suited for the exploitation
and indirect emissions vary according to plant size. of RES, with an average 4.68 kWh/m2/d of solar irradiation,

--- Page 9 ---
B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111 109
Table 11
Total quantified emissions
Tm CO Sureste Jinámar Tazacorte P. Hidalgo
eq 2
Indirect emissions 2,720 1,262 138 172
Direct emissions 12,336 9,642 22 138.7
Total 17,879 10,904 160 310.7
Fig. 7. Percentage of direct and indirect emissions of the analyzed WWTPs.
a 5.5–8 m/s wind speed range in many suitable areas [59] and power grid [62]. The approach that has been taken in Gran
an average 19–20 kW/m wave energy potential. The integra- Canaria, a highly populated island, took into account the
tion of these clean technologies, (internal and external to the large amount of sludge on the island and its optimized road
plant) will be explained and simulated in later publications. network. However, specific solutions need to be analyzed for
The direct methane emissions are the most difficult to each region on an individual basis, depending on the type
reduce due to the impossibility of changing the ambient of sludge to be treated and whether the objective (nutrient
temperature. With respect to sludge removal, and given the recovery, obtaining compost, obtaining energy, mass reduc-
increasingly more restrictive waste discharge legislation tion, and stabilization, etc.) or technique is economically and
[60], a new approach is required for its treatment (either technically feasible.
centralized or in each plant) through the implementa- Finally, the selection of the technology used for manag-
tion of technologies such as anaerobic digestion to reduce ing wastewater sludge should have as one of its main criteria
emissions, to generate energy as a by-product (possibly evaluation of the environmental footprint. Teoh and Li [63]
for consumption by the plant itself) and to contribute to published a study in 2020 using life cycle assessments of each
enhancing the circular economy in the islands. process. Their conclusions confirm that anaerobic digestion,
A new economic approach is required in the islands, pyrolysis, and supercritical water oxidation are not only
one that interrelates with sustainability and aims to increase more effective in reducing sludge volume and pollutants but
the value of the endogenous products, materials, and also have lower global warming and toxicity potential.
resources of the application area, enabling them to remain
in the economy for the longest possible time. In this regard,
4. Conclusions
European policies are committed to the transition of the
linear economy towards a circular model, in which waste The aim of this study was to quantify and evaluate
generation is minimized. In the particular situation with GHG emissions in WWTPs. The proliferation of this kind of
which this study is concerned, restructuring the manage- plant has generated a new climate change focus within the
ment model of WWTPs could be used to facilitate second- islands and other regions characterized by its dependence
generation products. on external water and energy resources.
Until about a year ago, 98.5% of the sludge from the For the purposes of GHG emissions quantification in this
Canary Islands was dumped into landfills [61]. However, study, the absence of local/regional guidelines or a compre-
in Gran Canaria (responsible for 26% of the sludge in the hensive methodology to calculate the carbon footprint left
archipelago), a biomethanation plant has recently been by WWTPs resulted in the need to use IPCC protocols to
installed to treat the sludge and generate biogas that sub- obtain many of the results.
sequently generates energy through a combustion process According to the results obtained, a typical large capac-
covering 60% of the energy demand of the Ecopark where ity plant (>10,000 m3/d) in the Canary Islands would emit
the plant is located. The next step is to exceed 100% of the 446,975 Tn CO per plant over its estimated 25 y of useful
eq 2
energy demand and inject the energy surplus into the insular life. After taking into account the number and capacities of all

--- Page 10 ---
110 B. Del Río-Gamero et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 197 (2020) 101–111
the WWTPs in the islands, the contribution of the archipelago dimensions of climate change meanings, Geoforum, 104 (2019)
amounts to 228,436 Tn CO/y. 92–100.
eq 2 [7] M. Wang, C. Feng, Impacts of oriented technologies and
In terms of indirect emissions, energy consumption is
economic factors on China’s industrial climate mitigation,
the most intensive emitter in the vast majority of the plants
J. Cleaner Prod., 233 (2019) 1016–1028.
under study, with aerobic processes as the main consumers. [8] G. Bachner, J. Mayer, K.W. Steininger, Costs or benefits?
Likewise, the robust equipment necessary for the operation Assessing the economy-wide effects of the electricity sector’s
of the smaller-sized WWTPs increases their specific energy low carbon transition – the role of capital costs, divergent risk
perceptions and premiums, Energy Strategy Rev., 26 (2019)
consumption and consequently their emissions, with per-
100373.
centages of 0.06% compared to 2.42% Tn CO/m3 in the
eq 2 [9] IEA, World Energy Outlook 2016, International Energy Agency,
largest and smallest size plants, respectively. With respect to Paris.
the development of improved climate change mitigation, the [10] E.S. Spang, W.R. Moomaw, K.S. Gallagher, P.H. Kirshen,
introduction of the use of RES in WWTPs is a feasible and D.H. Marks, The water consumption of energy production:
an international comparison, Environ. Res. Lett., 9 (2014)
highly attractive option.
105002.
Regarding the transport of sludge, the relative GHG
[11] C.P. Tan, Q. Zhi, The energy-water nexus: a literature review
emissions value increases as the size of the plant decreases. of the dependence of energy on water, Energy Procedia,
This is because the very small plants are located in small 88 (2016) 277–284.
municipalities, generally far from landfills. Consequently, [12] J.L. Peña, R. Rodríguez, Are EU’s climate and energy package
20-20-20 targets achievable and compatible? Evidence from the
the replacement of this type of sludge management model
impact of renewables on electricity prices, Energy, 183 (2019)
and the incorporation of technologies that facilitate a circu-
477–486.
lar economy must be specifically analyzed to assess whether [13] P. Tsafack, D. Ngwashi, B. Ducharne, E. Tanyi, Greenness
on-site management outweighs the advantages of central- percentage of the said green renewable energy: a case study,
ized management as well as causing a lower environmental Energy Rep., 5 (2019) 979–986.
[14] A. Rahil, R. Gammon, N. Brown, J. Udie, M.U. Mazhar, Potential
impact as a whole.
economic benefits of carbon dioxide (CO) reduction due to
The direct emissions of the WWTP plants are particularly 2
renewable energy and electrolytic hydrogen fuel deployment
significant, due not only to the amounts involved but more under current and long term forecasting of the social carbon
importantly to their much higher warming potential than cost (SCC), Energy Rep., 5 (2019) 602–618.
CO. Of the chemical compounds analyzed, the CH values [15] Y.L. Liu, M. Hejazi, P. Kyle, S.H. Kim, E. Davies,
2 4 D.G. Miralles, A.J. Teuling, Y.J. He, D. Niyogi, Global and
are more constant than those for NO due to the installation
2 regional evaluation of energy for water, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
of de-nitrification processes in some plants. In this regard,
50 (2016) 9736–9745.
reducing the amount of emissions entails a high degree of [16] P.T. Vo, H.H. Ngo, W. Guo, J.L. Zhou, P.D. Nguyen, A. Listowski,
difficulty, as the conventional processes of the plants them- X.C. Wang, A mini-review on the impacts of climate change
selves generate it. on wastewater reclamation and reuse, Sci. Total Environ.,
494 (2014) 9–17.
[17] J. Bosque-Maurel, J. Vilá-Valentí, Geography of Spain, Planeta
Acknowledgment Publishing House, Barcelona, 1990.
[18] M. de Terán, L.S. Sabaris, Regional Geography of Spain, Ariel
This research has been co-funded by ERDF funds, Publishing House, Barcelona, 1987.
INTERREG MAC 2014-2020 program, MITIMAC project [19] G. Morales-Matos, The Canary Islands, an isolated region?,
Assoc. Spanish Geogr. Bull., 32 (2001) 155–175.
(MAC2/1.1a/263).
[20] Articles 349 and 355 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (TFEU), The Outermost Regions, Technical
References Sheets on the European Union, Estrasburgo, France, 2016.
[21] Great Virtual Encyclopedia of the Canary Islands: Nature and
[1] IPCC, Working Group I Technical Support Unit, An IPCC Culture, GEVIC Project, Rincon Association for the Study of
Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5°C Social Creativity, Canary Islands, Spain, Available at: http://
Above Pre-Industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse www.gevic.net/, access date: 02/02/2015.
Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the [22] Canary Islands Institute of Statistics, Indicators for Years on
Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable Water Supply and Treatment in Canary Islands, Total Volume
Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty, Intergovern- of Water Controlled and Distributed to Users, Las Palmas,
mental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva, Switzerland, 2018. 2013.
[2] J.C. Doelman, E. Stehfest, A. Tabeau, H. van Meijl, Making the [23] J.J. Braojos, I. Farrujia, J.D. Fernandez, Tenerife Water Resources
Paris agreement climate targets consistent with food security to Climate Change, Island Council of Aguas de Tenerife, Canary
objectives, Global Food Secur., 23 (2019) 93–103. Islands, Spain, 2006.
[3] G.M. Locosselli, E.P. de Camargo, T.C.L. Moreira, E. Todesco, [24] United Nations, Water for a Sustainable World. Report on Water
M. de Fátima Andrade, C.D.S. de André, P.A. de André, Resources in the World, Italy, 2015.
J.M. Singer, L.S. Ferreira, P.H.N. Saldiva, M.S. Buckeridge, The [25] J.M. Veza, Desalination in the Canary Islands: an update,
role of air pollution and climate on the growth of urban trees, Desalination, 133 (2001) 259–270.
Sci. Total Environ., 666 (2019) 652–661. [26] Government of the Canary Islands, Canary Islands Energy
[4] L. Onofri, F. Bianchin, V. Boatto, How to assess future Plan, Ministry of Industry, Commerce and New Technologies,
agricultural performance under climate change? A case-study Canary Islands, Spain, 2007.
on the Veneto region, Agric. Food Econ., 7 (2019) 16. [27] J.R. Stokes, A. Horvath, Energy and air emission effects of water
[5] J.F.T. de Souza, S.A Pacca, How far can low-carbon energy supply, Environ. Sci. Technol., 43 (2009) 2680–2687.
scenarios reach based on proven technologies?, Mitigation [28] Y.F. Gu, Y.-N. Dong, H.T. Wang, A. Keller, J. Xu, T. Chiramba,
Adapt. Strategies Global Change, 24 (2019) 687–705. F.T. Li, Quantification of the water, energy and carbon footprints
[6] C. de Guttry, D. Süsser, M. Döring, Situating climate change: of wastewater treatment plants in China considering a water–
psychological distances as tool to understand the multifaceted energy nexus perspective, Ecol. Indic., 60 (2016) 402–409.