--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Cleaner Production 524 (2025) 146487
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Cleaner Production
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro
Greenhouse gas emission reduction strategies for petrochemical wastewater
treatment: Life cycle assessment of retrofitting scenarios
Xin Baoa,1, Song Gaob,1, Hong Yaoa, Xiaoping Fub, Xinyu Gaoa, Hui Wangb,*,
Wei Xinga,c,**
aSchool of Environment, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
bSINOPEC Research Institute of Petroleum Processing Co., Ltd., Beijing, 100083, China
cBeijing Key Laboratory of Novel Materials Genetic Engineering and Application for Rail Transit, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
H I G H L I G H T S G R A P H I C A L A B S T R A C T
•GHG emissions & synergy analysis
evaluate petrochemical wastewater
treatment plant.
•Three retrofit options reduce GHG by
30.5 %, 28.9 %, and 10.9 %.
•Life cycle assessment confirms environ-
mental impact mitigation.
•Offers actionable insights for sustain-
able, energy-efficient wastewater
systems.
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction from petrochemical wastewater treatment is imperative to alleviate
Petrochemical wastewater treatment industrial pollution problems. The aim of this study is to assess the GHG emissions and environmental impacts of
Greenhouse gas emissions a petrochemical wastewater treatment plant in eastern China and to give effective optimization recommenda-
Carbon neutrality
tions. A comprehensive assessment of the carbon emissions of the baseline scenario was firstly carried out,
Life cycle assessment
followed by a synergy analysis of the synergies between water, energy and carbon. The three retrofit scenarios
Energy recovery
demonstrated varying levels of GHG reduction relative to the baseline: 30.5 % for S1 (energy recovery), 28.9 %
for S2 (advanced technologies), and 10.9 % for S3 (water reuse). The final retrofit scenario achieves near-net-
zero emissions while enabling significant energy recovery. These findings underscore the importance of inte-
grating advanced technologies and energy-efficient processes in order to transform wastewater treatment sys-
tems into sustainable, carbon-neutral operations.
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author. School of Environment, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China.
E-mail addresses: wangh.ripp@sinopec.com(H. Wang), weix@bjtu.edu.cn(W. Xing).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2025.146487
Received 31 March 2025; Received in revised form 27 July 2025; Accepted 24 August 2025
Available online 28 August 2025
0959-6526/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- Page 2 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
1. Introduction to assist in judging the environmental impacts other than climate change
(Naushad, 2018), and explores the GHG emission characteristics and
Since the advent of industrialization, the global average temperature water-energy-carbon synergies of the PWWTP. Based on the progress of
has increased by approximately 1.1 ◦C, with greenhouse gas (GHG) existing research, three groups of retrofit scenarios are preset, and the
emissions representing the primary driver of climate change (Gillett GHG emission reductions contributed by these scenarios are assessed, as
et al., 2021; IPCC, 2023). At the general debate of the 75th session of the well as their environmental impacts, and the impacts of energy structure
United Nations General Assembly, China made a commitment to and chemicals on overall GHG emissions are judged through sensitivity
endeavor to have carbon dioxide emissions peak before 2030 and ach- analyses. The significance of this study is to assess the GHG emissions of
ieve carbon neutrality before 2060. This objective now serves as a existing typical PWWTP and to predict the emission reductions that can
central guiding principle in China’s climate policy (Chen et al., 2021; be contributed by different retrofitting technologies, aiming to raise
NDRC, 2021; Zhou et al., 2019). It is imperative that all industries take public awareness and attention to refinery wastewater, and striving to
action in order to meet the established GHG reduction targets. Studies find a set of wastewater treatment modes that can achieve carbon
have demonstrated that 3 % of global electricity (Chen et al., 2021) neutrality goals, and to make effective recommendations for the man-
consumption and 1.6 % of GHG emissions can be attributed to the agement of existing petrochemical wastewater.
wastewater industry, which also consumes mechanical energy and
chemicals (Lu et al., 2018; Sharawat and Dahiya, 2020), and the issue of 2. Materials and methods
GHG emissions from industrial wastewater treatment is becoming
increasingly problematic against the backdrop of accelerating industri- This study focuses on a PWWTP in eastern China, which treats pro-
alization (W. Hu et al., 2019). duction and domestic wastewater from petrochemical plants, with a
The expansion of the oil refining sector has resulted in a significant treatment capacity of 300,000 tons per day.
surge in the demand for water in industrial processes (Sun et al., 2018). The GHG emissions of the PWWTP were analyzed under various
The concomitant issues of energy consumption and GHG emissions have projection scenario, which accounts for on-site and off-site emissions,
emerged as pivotal concerns that necessitate urgent attention (Narayan including those from electricity consumption, chemical usage, and
Thorat and Kumar Sonwani, 2022). It is estimated that the generation of waste disposal. Additionally, a full life cycle assessment (LCA) was
wastewater associated with the production of one ton of petrochemicals conducted to evaluate the environmental impacts of the PWWTP under
is in the range of 0.4–1.5 tons (Jafarinejad and Jiang, 2019). Refinery different scenarios.
effluents have a complex composition, consisting mainly of organic
compounds such as hydrocarbons, phenol, oils and fats, and sulfides, 2.1. System boundary
with long treatment processes and high energy and chemical con-
sumption (Rueda-Ma´rquez et al., 2016; Singh and Shikha, 2019; Varjani The entire life cycle of a petrochemical wastewater treatment system
et al., 2020). In China, the typical location for refineries is within includes wastewater reception, treatment in Area A, treatment in Area B
designated industrial parks, where wastewater is collected and treated and sludge disposal. The upstream environment includes the petro-
in a centralized manner (Zhang et al., 2008).The treatment methods chemical plant that discharges wastewater to the treatment plant and
commonly employed in such facilities encompass a range of technolo- provides electricity and heat (through a captive cogeneration plant), the
gies, including physical and chemical processes (flocculation, vapour chemical producer that provides the treatment chemicals, and the na-
stripping, adsorption, air flotation) as well as biological methods (aer- tional grid that provides the electricity. The downstream environment
obic activated sludge, anaerobic biological methods, membrane treat- includes natural waters that receive treated discharges and sludge
ment)(Guo et al., 2024). treatment companies that treat the remaining sludge.
The existing literature has devoted relatively little attention to the Area A is the site of the treatment of highly concentrated organic
topic of GHG emissions from petrochemical wastewater treatment plant wastewater, including that derived from the production of BDO and
(PWWTP). This is despite the fact that PWWTP have a number of PTA. The treatment process in Area A comprises pre-treatment, anaer-
characteristics that can lead to increased GHG emissions, including high obic bio-filters and tertiary air flotation. The residual sludge is then
aeration, high residual sludge volumes, and high chemical consumption subjected to deep drying and subsequent transportation to an off-site
(Muhaba et al., 2024). Moreover, previous studies have predominantly sanitary treatment plant. Area B is responsible for the treatment of
concentrated on GHG emissions from wastewater treatment processes, low concentration production and domestic wastewater from the
predominantly focusing on methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), petrochemical plant, in addition to treated wastewater from Area A. The
while categorizing carbon dioxide (CO2) as organic matter from bio- principal process is A/A/O biological treatment, with the residual sludge
logical sources (IPCC, 2019). subsequently undergoing dewatering and delivered off-site for sludge
However, the GHG emission dynamics of petrochemical wastewater disposal.
treatment systems differ fundamentally from those of conventional In Fig. 1, GHG emissions sources—including electricity and heat
municipal systems. Municipal wastewater contains predominantly consumption (Scope 2), biological decomposition of organics (Scope 1),
biogenic organic matter, and the resulting CO2 emissions from biological and upstream/downstream emissions (Scope 3)—are fully represented
treatment are typically considered biogenic and excluded from Scope 1 within the model framework, even if not explicitly labeled in the dia-
reporting under IPCC guidelines (IPCC, 2019). In contrast, petrochem- grams. Similarly, emissions savings from methane recovery, energy
ical wastewater is rich in fossil-derived organics—such as intermediates reuse, and water reuse are accounted for in the life cycle analysis and
from BDO or PTA production—leading to CO2 emissions that are fossil in explained in the corresponding scenario descriptions.
origin. These fossil-based emissions should be accounted for as Scope 1 The water quality of influent and effluent in Area A and B is pre-
fossil CO2, but are often overlooked in life cycle and carbon inventory sented in Table 1.
studies. This study explicitly addresses this methodological gap by
treating CO2 emissions from petrochemical wastewater as 2.2. Methods of accounting
fossil-sourced, thereby providing a more accurate and sector-specific
assessment of GHG impacts. 2.2.1. GHG accounting methodologies
This study constructs a systematic approach to assess and account for GHG emissions from the PWWTP are classified into three principal
the GHG emissions of the PWWTP with more complete system bound- categories: Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 (Wintergreen and Delaney,
aries, considers the GHG emissions of Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 2007). Scope1 encompasses direct GHG emissions from the wastewater
(Wintergreen and Delaney, 2007), introduces a life cycle assessment tool treatment process, while Scope2 represents indirect GHG emissions
2

--- Page 3 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
resulting from purchased energy sources. Finally, Scope3 encompasses 0.12 kg CO2 eq/MJ.
upstream and downstream indirect GHG emissions associated with The Scope 3 category encompasses GHG emissions resulting from the
wastewater treatment activities: utilization of chemicals and those originating from downstream sludge
treatment.
GHGTotal=GHGScope1+GHGScope2+GHGScope3(cid:0) GHGRecovery (1)
GHGScope3=EChemicals+Esludge (4)
Scope 1 includes three types of GHG: CO2, CH4 and N2O. According
to the guidelines developed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate GHGRecovery includes GHG emission reductions from recovered re-
Change (IPCC) in 2006, carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from biological sources and energy and is calculated according to the following Eq. (5).
wastewater treatment are generally considered to be emissions from
GHGRecovery=Ei,Recovery×EFi,Recovery (5)
biogenic sources, and are therefore not included in climate change
impact calculations. However, in petrochemical wastewater treatment,
2.2.2. Calculation of the Water-Energy-Carbon Coupling Index (WECCI)
especially in BDO and PTA production, organic matter is mainly derived
GWP, EF, and CF were selected to evaluate the performance of the
from fossil hydrocarbons. Therefore, the CO2 released during microbial
wastewater treatment system in terms of effluent quality, energy con-
degradation is of fossil origin and should be included in Scope 1 fossil
sumption, and carbon emissions, respectively.
CO2 emissions. This adjustment is in line with the recommendations of
GWF was calculated according to Water Footprint Assessment
ISO 14067 and the 2019 Revision of the IPCC Guidelines, which
Manual (Aldaya et al., 2012):
emphasise source attribution based on carbon sources rather than
treatment pathways. This study provides a more accurate carbon foot- GWF=max[L/(Cmax(i)(cid:0) Cnat(i))] (6)
print for petrochemical wastewater treatment systems by explicitly
calculating fossil source CO2 emissions, with detailed equations pro- Where:
vided in the Supplementary Note: L — the total pollutant load, kg;
GHGScope1=ECO2+ECH4+EN2O+Efc (2) watC erm ,a mx(i g) /— the maximum discharge concentration of pollutant in
L;
Scope 2 GHG emissions in this study include those associated with Cnat(i) — the natural concentration of pollutant, mg/L.
externally supplied electricity and heat, encompassing energy consumed EF was calculated as follows:
in processes such as aeration, membrane operation, and sludge
EF=E/Q (7)
dewatering.
GHGScope2=CEi,energy×EFi,energy (3) Where:
E (cid:0) The total daily energy consumption, kWh/d;
Where: Q — The daily treatment scale, m3/d.
CEi,energy — Consumption of purchased energy, kWh(GJ); CF was calculated as follows:
kWhE (F Mi,e Jn )e .r gy h— T dh ee e im ledis s cio an ufa lact to ior o f tp eu pr sc h fa os re d e el e ec lt er cic trit icy i, k yg C mO i2 e ioq n/ CF=GHGTotal/Q (8)
T e ta lc n s th t e ss
factors are shown in Table S1; The emission factor for heat is taken as Normalized GWF, EF, and CF were calculated as follows:
Fig. 1. Schematic of the wastewater treatment process, highlighting areas A and B, including major inputs and output (BDOWW: Butane-1,4-diol production
wastewater; PTAWW: Pureterephthalic acid production wastewater; DWW: Domestic wastewater; PWW: Production wastewater).
3

--- Page 4 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
Aʹ=(Amax(cid:0) A)/(Amax(cid:0) Amin) (9) Table 2
Summary of key parameters and engineering rationale for retrofit scenarios in
Where: PWWTP.
Amax&Amin — The maximum and minimum values of the footprint, Type of Baseline S1 Energy S2 Advanced S3 Water
respectively. The higher the value of AN, the better the performance of parameter recovery technology recovery
the WWTP. Waste water A/O + Baseline + AF +A/A/O → S2 +heat
The current study employed the four-quadrant clustering (FQC) treatment AF Biogas AnMBR +MABR recovery +
method, which involves plotting GWF’ as horizontal coordinates and EF’ process Recovery + UF/RO
as vertical coordinates and the color-coded circle functional nodes CF’ in Sludge system
Incineration
response to color differences in data points to assess the operating per-
Residual sludge 0.0023 Same as 0.0017 (Rong Same as S2
formance of the WWTP and suggest strategies for enhancing the system’s production Baseline et al., 2023; Yao
efficiency. The method categorizes the daily operational data into four (kg sludge/ et al., 2023)
regions I – IV based on average GWF’ and EF’ values, with the different m3)
Biogas recovery / 0.306 0.356 (Kong Same as S2
intervals representing distinct types of synergies and trade-offs (Ni et al.,
(kg CH4/m3) et al., 2021)
2023). Membrane area / / 17,000–18,500 ( Same as S2
(m3) L. Hu et al.,
2024)
2.3. Transformation scenario forecast analysis
Energy 2.26 Same as 1.50 (Y. Hu et al., Same as S2
consumption Baseline 2022)
Three technical modification pathways were identified and formu- of biological
lated to optimize the retrofitting strategy of the existing PWWTP. These treatment unit
in Area A
scenarios represent a combination of practical retrofitting measures that
(kWh/m3)
have already been partially adopted by the enterprise and forward-
Energy 0.57 Same as 0.34 (Veleva Same as S2
looking configurations derived from a synthesis of existing academic consumption Baseline et al., 2022)
research and industrial reports. The selection of each scenario was based of biological
on its potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, enhance resource treatment unit
in Area B
recovery efficiency, and maintain operational stability under petro- (kWh/m3)
chemical wastewater conditions. The scenarios reflect a progressive HRT of Area A 24 Same as 16 (L. Hu et al., Same as S2
enhancement in system complexity and integration level, ranging from (h) Baseline 2024)
energy recovery retrofits to advanced membrane bioreactor upgrades HRT of Area B 24 Same as 12 (Yao et al., Same as S2
and water reuse systems. A detailed breakdown of the process configu- (h) Baseline 2023)
Increase in / Small Reduced Additional
ration and key operational parameters for each scenario is presented in
chemical type amounts of consumption of addition of
Table 2. PAM&PAC PAM&PAC HCl and
Baseline (Fig. 2, a): The A/O +AF biological treatment process is NaClO
the primary method employed for the remediation of petrochemical Type of Baseline S1 Energy S2 Advanced S3 Water
parameter recovery technology recovery
wastewater. The methane produced is not recovered, and the sludge
dewatered and transported for off-site disposal. The treated wastewater
is subsequently discharged into a natural water source, provided that it S3 Water recovery (Fig. 2, d): Recovering the potential thermal
meets the requisite standards. energy in the drainage water, through a water source heat pump. Add
S1 Energy recovery (Fig. 2, b): On a baseline basis, biogas (mainly the external drainage water reuse device, using UF + RO process to
CH4) generated from the anaerobic treatment session in Area A is recover the external drainage water and reuse it to the production hall of
recovered through a biogas compression unit and sent to the plant’s in- the plant as recycled water, reducing the use of fresh water. This sce-
house thermal media furnace for incineration. The residual sludge nario further upgrades the PWWTP to a net-zero discharge plant,
generated in Area B is centrifugally dewatered to 80 % and sent to the reducing the burden on the downstream environment and maximizing
plant’s Cogeneration Center to be adsorbed into the coal for incinera- the recovery of all the energy in the effluent.
tion. This scenario effectively recovers the chemical energy in the dis-
charged material in order to slow down the use of electrical energy.
S2 Advanced technology (Fig. 2, c): Based on S1, the AF process in 2.4. LCA data inventory
Area A was replaced by Anaerobic Membrane Bio-reactor (AnMBR)
technology to recover more biogas and reduce energy consumption, and For the baseline, the full life cycle inventory was constructed using
the traditional A/A/O process in Area B was replaced by Membrane on-site sampling and testing to determine influent and effluent quality
Aeration Bio-reactor (MABR) technology. This technology not only has indicators. Data on electricity, heat, chemical consumption, and residual
significant advantages in terms of energy saving, but also effectively sludge were collected from equipment instrumentation and recorded in
reduces the amount of residual sludge and the use of pharmaceuticals. the enterprise’s statistical ledger. GHG emissions from the biochemical
The choice of advanced wastewater treatment technology as a retrofit stage of wastewater treatment were calculated using process-specific
option can further reduce the consumption of electricity and chemicals formulas and pollutant load data. The life cycle inventories for S1, S2,
and improve energy recovery. and S3 were derived from literature data and expert estimates. Detailed
Table 1
Water quality indicators for regions A and B.
Area Q (m3/d) Type Influent and effluent quality (mg/L)
CODin CODout TNin TNout TPin TPout
Area A 7430 Mean 9188.5 98.2 75.8 71.0 2.0 1.2
SD 1938.2 15.5 16.3 12.1 0.9 0.5
Area B 29914 Mean 1768.7 30.0 26.2 7.8 2.5 0.2
SD 484.8 5.2 9.4 3.3 1.1 0.1
4

--- Page 5 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
Fig. 2. Process flow for PWWTP’s retrofit scenario
(a) Baseline, (b) S1 Energy recovery, (c) S2 Advanced technology, (d) S3 Water recovery.
5

--- Page 6 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
LCA inventory data are presented in Table S4. This development was undertaken by PWWTP in order to meet the
further environmental requirements of the local government, with the
2.5. Environmental impact assessment: LCA result that higher energy consumption and elevated GHG emissions were
produced. In the year 2021, the total life cycle GHG emissions of the
This study adhered to the four LCA iteration steps outlined in ISO PWWTP were 51686.8 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO2eq), with
14040 and 14044. The assessment utilized Simapro v. 8.0.5.13 in an average of 4307.2 t CO2eq per month (Fig. 3(b)). The direct GHG
conjunction with the Ecoinvent 3 database. The LCA was conducted emissions result from the microbial decomposition of pollutants in the
utilising the ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) method (Huijbregts et al., 2017), biochemical treatment stage and from sludge disposal. As shown in
which was implemented in SimaPro. The selection of this method is Fig. 3(b), direct GHG emissions from the biochemical treatment stage
attributable to two key factors: its pertinence to environmental emis- accounted for 12.5 % of total GHG emissions, including emissions from
sions from wastewater systems, and its alignment with prevailing LCA fossil sources CO2. While previous studies have typically categorized
practices. Six primary environmental impact categories were assessed: carbon dioxide produced during biological treatment as a biogenic
terrestrial ecotoxicity (kg 1,4-DB eq), marine ecotoxicity (kg 1,4-DB eq), source and assumed that its natural cycle has no impact on the climate,
fossil resource scarcity (kg oil eq), Ozone formation, Terrestrial eco- this study adopted a different approach. Residual sludge from petro-
systems (kg NOx eq), mineral resource scarcity (kg Cu eq). The results chemical wastewater transported off-site for disposal under baseline
were used to quantify the relative contributions of each treatment unit to conditions However, anaerobic conditions also lead to methane emis-
the overall environmental impact. Specific parameters were selected as sions with a global warming potential (GWP) 28 times that of carbon
detailed in Table S6. dioxide, and despite partial methane recovery, methane accounts for
31.7 % of the direct GHG emissions in this stage, despite partial
3. Results and discussion recovery.
Electricity consumption is a significant source of GHG emissions
3.1. Quantification of GHG emissions from wastewater treatment plants, accounting for 38.9 % of total
emissions. Of this, about 50 % is used for aeration in the biochemical
3.1.1. GHG emissions and distribution treatment stage and 36 % for effluent transfer.
As demonstrated in Fig. 3(a), the PWWTP’s GHG emissions exhibit In addition, 16 % of GHG emissions come from the use of chemicals,
fluctuations between 2017 and 2020, with a substantial increase which are mainly used to regulate the physico-chemical parameters of
observed in 2021. A detailed investigation into the available data and wastewater to meet the conditions of biochemical treatment, and to
relevant background research has identified the reason for this change as adsorb and settle sludge and oils. The chemicals employed encompass
the addition of a sludge drying unit and a VOCs treatment unit in 2021. ammonia, sodium hydroxide, flocculants, and so forth. It is imperative
Fig. 3. Contribution of GHG emissions from various sources to GHG emissions from PWWTP
(a) Total PWWTP GHG emissions over five years (b) Share of emissions of each type of GHG in 2021 (c) GHG emissions by month in 2021.
6

--- Page 7 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
to incorporate the GHG emissions generated by these chemicals in the wastewater treatment system.
upstream production process into the calculation. According to the calculation results, the FQC method mentioned
As shown in Fig. 3(c), GHG emissions from WWTPs decrease during above is used to study the water-energy-carbon operation of the plant,
the winter months (January to November and December) in 2021, and the four different quadrants represent different water-energy-
mainly in the form of reduced GHG emissions from sludge treatment due carbon synergies. In short, in the coordinate system, the data on the
to reduced microbial activity in winter, which slows down the degra- right has lower carbon emissions than the data on the left, and the data
dation of organic matter in the effluent and reduces the amount of on the top has lower energy consumption than the data on the bottom.
sludge produced. In addition, other types of GHGs show less variation Fig. 6shows the distribution of water-energy-carbon samples in the
from season to season and the overall situation is stable. wastewater treatment system of a chemical fiber enterprise in different
months. As can be seen from Fig. 6(a), the vast majority of samples in
3.1.2. GHG emissions intensity 2017–2018 were distributed in BS (optimal water-energy-carbon syn-
The GHG emission intensity per ton of wastewater treated by the ergy Area), indicating that the wastewater treatment system of a
PWWTP is 4.01–5.65 kg CO2eq/m3 (Fig. 4 (a)), which is significantly chemical fiber enterprise showed high quality water-energy-carbon
higher than that of municipal wastewater (0.58–1.14 kg CO2eq/m3)(Du synergy in daily operation. A small part of the samples is distributed
et al., 2023). Moreover, the requirement of 1.50–2.05 kg CO2eq per ton in LS (low coordination Area), which belong to winter months, indi-
of COD treated is comparable to the results of extant industry studies cating that the carbon emission of the wastewater treatment system
(Muhaba et al., 2024). fluctuates in winter, and it is suggested to carry out targeted optimiza-
Area A is responsible for the production of 9.08 kg CO2eq of GHG tion of energy conservation and emission reduction. From Fig. 6(b), it
emissions per ton of wastewater treated, while Area B is responsible for can be seen that from 2019 to 2021, the increase in sludge drying, BDO
the production of 2.57 kg CO2eq of GHG emissions per ton of wastewater pre-treatment and other installations significantly increases the overall
treated (Fig. 4(b)). Furthermore, Area A is responsible for the production energy consumption level of the wastewater treatment system, leading
of 1.08 kg CO2eq of GHG emissions per ton of COD removed, and Area A to a shift in the distribution of sample points towards the LCT (Low
is responsible for the production of 4.54 kg CO2eq of GHG emissions per Carbon Trade-Off area), suggesting that there is a typical process of
ton of COD removed (Fig. 4(b)). In comparison to Area A, Area B is exchanging energy consumption for water quality as the load of the
responsible for the production of 71.7 % fewer GHG emissions per tonne wastewater treatment system increases and the treatment requirements
of wastewater treated and 320.2 % more GHG emissions per tonne of improve. While enforcing higher wastewater discharge standards,
COD treated (Fig. 4 (b)). This discrepancy can be attributed to the fact PWWTP should reduce the overall energy consumption level and follow
that the BDO and PTA wastewater treated in Area A is characterised by a an overall low-carbon operation strategy through targeted energy-
high COD organic wastewater, which is treated more efficiently and saving retrofits, such as renewable energy utilization and energy
consequently generates fewer GHG emissions per tonne of pollutant recovery.
treated. Conversely, Area B produces more GHG emissions per tonne of
water treated.
3.3. Environmental impacts of different scenarios
3.2. Wecci 3.3.1. GHG emissions
All three scenarios, as shown in Fig. 7(a), show quantifiable re-
As shown in Fig. 5, the GWF’ (normalized gray water footprint) of the ductions in GHG emissions.S1 is an engineered retrofit of the plant that
petrochemical wastewater treatment system basically remained stable has already been implemented in recent years, and after the retrofit S1’s
from 2017 to 2021, with a slight upward trend, indicating stable GHG emissions decreased by 30.5 % from the baseline. In this case, the
pollutant removal efficiency by the PWWTP over the assessed period. inclusion of a biogas recovery unit resulted in a slight increase of 0.5 %
Through consulting the procedure documents, it is analyzed that the in GHG emissions from electricity. However, this increase is offset by the
reason may be the addition of sludge drying device in 2020, the addition energy recovered from methane recovery from biogas, equivalent to a
of odor phase 4 facilities in the water line, the addition of acid extraction reduction of 20,363.43 t CO2eq in 2021. In addition, any modification
tank, neutralization tank and pump tank in 2021, and the BDO pre- from initial off-site sludge disposal to incineration of residual sludge
treatment device. These installations and ancillary equipment create after drying requires additional energy input, resulting in an increase in
additional energy consumption and associated carbon emissions, GHG emissions from the PWWTP of 12,931.58 t CO2eq in 2021.How-
thereby reducing the energy ENF ’and CF’ performance of the ever, this modification also reduces the methane gas emitted directly
Fig. 4. PWWTP GHG Emission Intensity. (a) per ton water (b) per ton COD.
7

--- Page 8 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
Fig. 5. Annual changes in (a)GWF, (b)ENF, and (c)CF for the normalization of wastewater treatment system in The chemical fiber enterprise.
from the off-site disposal of sludge and recovers some of the heat energy emissions from this unit. Collectively, S2 reduces GHG emissions from
during the incineration process. the PWWTP by 28.9 % compared to the pre-retrofit period.
The second option (S2) required modifications to the biological The addition of a water recirculation unit to S3 increased the amount
treatment processes in Areas A and B, which included the MABR and of water recirculated by 0.3 m3/m3. The treated water can be reused in
AnMBR processes. Both of these new technologies have proven to be the petrochemical plant as boiler water or recycled cooling water, thus
effective in reducing GHG emissions. The MABR process requires less replacing the natural water source and offsetting 6694 t CO2eq GHG
aeration than the A/A/O system, resulting in a 36 % reduction in elec- emissions. However, the installation increases energy consumption
tricity consumption. In addition, less sludge is produced, resulting in a (1.031 kWh/m3 of reuse water) and requires additional chemicals,
25 % reduction in GHG emissions from sludge treatment. Since the resulting in increased GHG emissions from this component. In addition,
MABR process reduces the amount of sludge, the use of flocculants S3 employs a wastewater source heat pump that recovers heat from the
(PAM, PAC) can be reduced. In total, the MABR technology can reduce discharged wastewater in the spring, fall, and winter months, thereby
GHG emissions equivalent to 21.2 % of the original process. The AnMBR offsetting GHG emissions of 11,666.27 t CO2eq. Overall, GHG emissions
process requires less energy to operate and produces more methane from of S3 were reduced by 10.9 % compared to the pre-retrofit period.
the biogas than the AF process, resulting in a 14.8 % reduction in GHG
8

--- Page 9 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
Fig. 6. Distribution of water-energy-carbon Samples in the chemical fiber enterprise Wastewater Treatment System: (a) 2017–2018, (b) 2019–2021.
3.3.2. Terrestrial ecotoxicity the most substantial reduction observed in S2 ((cid:0) 40.1 %)(Fig. 7(c)). The
The primary source of terrestrial ecotoxicity (TE) impacts is the most significant contributors to ME impacts were methane recovery (S1:
utilization of electrical energy. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the implementa- 30.1 %, S2: 6.8 %) and the reduced use of chemicals (S2: 29.2 %).
tion of S1 significantly mitigates these effects with a reduction of (cid:0) 50.6 Although the increase in electricity consumption in S3 resulted in a
%. Conversely, the sludge drying and incineration process has been negative impact on ME, the initiative to recover thermal energy fully
found to result in a slight negative impact, with a value of 0.4 %. The offset this effect, resulting in a modest overall mitigation of environ-
implementation of S2 has the effect of reducing electrical energy con- mental impacts ((cid:0) 3.2 %).
sumption and increasing methane recycling, both of which contribute to
a reduction in fossil energy consumption. This has the consequence of 3.3.4. Fossil resource scarcity
exerting a positive impact on TE, with a reduction of (cid:0) 32.3 %. In The negative impact of Fossil resource scarcity (FRS) increased by
comparison to S2, S3 results in an increase in electrical energy con- 9.2 % after the implementation of S1. This is mainly due to a 28 % in-
sumption, which consequently leads to an increase in TE impacts. crease in thermal energy use from coal-fired thermal power plants
However, the overall reduction in impacts compared to the baseline is (Fig. 7(d)). However, methane gas recovery contributes to the reduction
significant, at (cid:0) 59.3 %. of fossil energy use, thus mitigating FRS ((cid:0) 20.1 %), although this does
not fully offset the negative impacts. The implementation of S2 reduces
3.3.3. Marine ecotoxicity fossil energy use, mainly due to a reduction in electricity consumption
In all scenarios, ME is mitigated in comparison to the baseline, with ((cid:0) 19.1 %) and an increase in methane recovery ((cid:0) 3.3 %). In addition,
9

--- Page 10 ---
X. Bao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 524 (2025) 146487
Fig. 7. LCA impact scores and the contribution of individual factors to the overall impact of the six LCA categories selected.
the reduction in sludge had the added benefit of reducing heat use and 3.3.5. Ozone formation, terrestrial ecosystems
chemical consumption in the sludge treatment process, which in turn The main impact of Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems (OF,
had a positive impact on the scarcity of fossil resources. In S3, the TE) comes from fossil energy use. In S1, the impact of OF, TE decreases
environmental impact of FRS due to increased electricity use is offset by ((cid:0) 13.6 %), mainly due to methane recovery reducing the use of fossil
heat recovery, reducing the impact of FRS by 7.3 % compared to S2. fuels ((cid:0) 23.1 %)(Fig. 7(e)). Although there are some negative impacts
10