--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Cleaner Production 509 (2025) 145592
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Cleaner Production
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jclepro
Methane emissions features from China’s municipal wastewater
management, based on the whole-process evaluation of collection,
treatment and discharge
Han Gaoa, Daming Weia,*, Peng Zhanga,b, Wenjing Zhanga,b, Gang Yana,b, Wenbo Xuea,
Yue Zhaoa,c, Weili Yea,d, Liqing Guoa,b, Shuojia Penga
aChinese Academy of Environmental Planning, Ministry of Ecology and Environment, Beijing, 100041, China
bCenter of Environmental Pollution and Greenhouse Gases Co-control, Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning, Beijing, 100041, China
cYellow River Ecology and Environment Protection Center, Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning, Beijing, 100041, China
dCenter for Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Regional Environment and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning, Beijing, 100041, China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Handling Editor: Shen Qu Municipal wastewater system, significantly influencing water environment via centralized treatment and
discharge, becomes a major methane emission source. Anthropogenic organic matter degrades and transfers into
Keywords: methane throughout whole processes of wastewater collection, treatment, discharge and sludge disposal, yet the
Methane emission overall emissions, major contributors, spatial variations, and the synergy between pollutant elimination and
Municipal wastewater system
emission mitigation remain rarely discussed. In this study we report a nationwide city-resolved estimate of
Whole process analysis
methane emission from municipal wastewater system, involving (1) sewer networks and uncollected wastewater;
Synergistic mitigation
(2) municipal wastewater treatment plants; (3) treated effluents; (4) sludge disposal, based on bottom-up
analysis with firm-level active data and localized emission factor. We demonstrated that methane emissions
from municipal wastewater system in China was 911 Gg, while wastewater collection (56.8 %) and sludge
disposal (34.6 %) were the dominant contributors to nationwide emissions, which were generally excluded from
previous estimations. Driven by regional climate, economic and infrastructure differences, major contributors for
regions and cities showed spatial discrepancies. A negative linear relationship was identified between the sewage
collection rate and per capita methane emissions in wastewater sector at city-level, which was explained by
sewer management features linked to influent COD concentration, wastewater transportation and treatment
efficiencies. Fine maintenance of sewer pipelines, appropriate match of sewers and treatment facilities, transition
in sludge disposal methods may serve to realize synergistic mitigation of pollution and methane emission. This
study highlighted the potential to achieve environment and climate co-benefits within municipal wastewater
system, providing scientific basis and policy foresight for sustainable urbanization progress.
1. Introduction recognized as a key source of anthropogenic methane emission
(Karakurt et al., 2012; Yusuf et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2021). The
In recent years, methane (CH4) received a major attention among all centralized collection and treatment system reduces excessive sewage
the greenhouse gases (GHGs), as methane emissions have a much larger organic content loads for public health and ecosystem protection, yet
global warming potential than CO2 (Dlugokencky, 2021; IPCC, 2021; provides abundant anaerobic conditions for methane production
Ferna´ndez-Amador et al., 2020; Myhre et al., 2013; Nisbet et al., 2019). (Daelman et al., 2012; Guisasola et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2015b; Shirai
CH4 emissions from inland waters significantly affect global climate, et al., 2003). Effluents, sewer overflows or unauthorized discharges pose
especially highly polluted areas (Cui et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2024; deterioration and eutrophication threats to aquatic environment (Liao
Rocher-Ros et al., 2023). Municipal wastewater system, which accounts et al., 2015; Qiu et al., 2010; Xie et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2021),
for approximately half of pollutant input to water environment, is also increasing the potential for methane emissions from downstream
* Corresponding author. No.15 Shixingdajie Rd., Shijingshan Dist., Beijing, China.
E-mail address: weidm@caep.org.cn(D. Wei).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2025.145592
Received 12 November 2024; Received in revised form 29 March 2025; Accepted 24 April 2025
Available online 25 April 2025
0959-6526/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

--- Page 2 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
(Brigham et al., 2019; Kan et al., 2024; Peterse et al., 2024; Wang et al., efficacy of these measures highly relies on regional technological ca-
2015; Yu et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2024). As a developing country, a dual pabilities and funding inputs, rendering their implementation on a
challenge lies for China to balance the ongoing urbanization process boarder scale challenging. For wastewater pollution control, advanced
with mitigating its environmental and climate impacts (Cui et al., 2024; treatment technologies such as high-efficiency sedimentation, nano-
Fan et al., 2024; Zhu and Wang, 2024). This urgency requires a filtration, constructed wetlands, were proposed to enhance pollutant
comprehensive overview of methane emissions from wastewater system, removal and comply with high water quality demands (Liu et al., 2021;
as well as synergistic optimization strategies targeting not only methane Tarpani and Azapagic, 2023). However, these technologies might
emission mitigation but also improvement to sustainable wastewater inevitably exacerbate climate impacts through increased GHG emissions
system and water environment quality. (Cao et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2023). Given the complex interplay be-
Accurate estimation of methane emissions from wastewater systems tween methane emissions and pollution mitigation, compounded by the
is crucial for effective strategic decision. The Intergovernmental Panel variation of wastewater systems practices across regions, there is an
on Climate Change (IPCC) has provided a methodology for estimation urgent need to conduct integrative research on the synergy effect and to
based on emission factors (EFs) (IPCC, 2006), which has become the develop multi-objective strategies on this basis.
mainstream approach for assessing methane emissions from wastewater In light of aforementioned research gaps, existing studies were
system. Macro-accounted methods using default EF values were often insufficient to provide comprehensive methane emission estimates for
adopted in national GHG emission inventories for wastewater sector entire wastewater systems and offer policy recommendations to achieve
(NDRC, 2018; EPA, 2022). However, these methods failed to involve the synergistic pollutant and emission reductions. To address these issues,
highly diverse conditions of construction, operation and natural influ- the main purposes of this study were: (1) to conduct a nationwide whole-
ence factors into estimation, resulted in lack of guidance for specific process estimation on methane emissions from China’s municipal
practices. Instead, bottom-up analysis has been developed to incorpo- wastewater system, including wastewater collection, treatment,
rate these factors into methane emission estimation, based on discharge and sludge disposal, based on bottom-up analysis using
high-resolution operational data (Du et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2015; Pan localized EFs for 8986 WWTPs and 328 cities; (2) to identify the
et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Wei et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2019) and dominant contributors of emissions at the national and regional levels,
selected EF values (Du et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2022) to reflect the address the correlation between pollution reduction and methane
individual differences of wastewater systems. This method has displayed emission, thereby providing specific guidance for achievable optimiza-
the superiority to reduce estimation uncertainty, providing detailed data tion methods towards synergetic environment and climate benefits.
for in-depth analysis and formulation, as well as compensating for the These findings offered scientific basis and policy foresight for integrated
limitations of macro-level estimation methods. methane emission reduction and pollutant mitigation of municipal
The boundaries of estimation also have a significant influence on wastewater systems, contributing to the sustainable development of
understanding the overall methane emission from the wastewater sys- future urbanization.
tem. Previous estimates mainly considered emissions from treatment
process and treated effluents in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) 2. Materials and methods
(Du et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2011; Wang et al. 2011,
2022; Wei et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2019), in compliance with the scope 2.1. System boundary and data acquisition
recommended by IPCC (IPCC, 2021). Nevertheless, to view from the
perspective of carbon flow in municipal wastewater (Chen et al., 2024), The system boundary included four sectors: (1) wastewater collec-
the organic matter undergoes loss during sewage transportation in tion, to analyze direct emissions from organic carbon decomposition in
sewers (Guisasola et al., 2008; Jin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2015a) and sewers and from uncollected wastewater discharge; (2) wastewater
ultimately meets complete degradation during sludge disposal (Lu et al., treatment, for direct methane emissions from treatment facilities in
2019; Wei et al., 2020), both of which are substantial sources of methane municipal WWTPs; (3) wastewater discharge, for emissions caused by
emission yet excluded from previous research framework and analyzed effluent discharge from municipal WWTPs; (4) sludge disposal, to
as separate parts. Studies concentrating on single perspective of carbon analyze methane emissions from three major sludge disposal pathways
emissions from sludge disposal (Pan et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2024) or in China: landfilling, incineration and composting (Fig. 1). Urban septic
wastewater collection system (Jin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2015a; Zhu tanks were excluded due to the lack of data, even though the significant
et al., 2024) proposed advanced estimation tools (e.g., assessment contribution of methane from pretreatment systems were widely re-
models, empirical equations). However, these studies overlooked the ported (Liao et al., 2015). Owing to the limited implementation of
influence on specific practices of wastewater treatment as upstream or anaerobic digestion in China, emissions from anaerobic digestion were
downstream, which would lead to differences in influent concentration presumed to be negligible and excluded from subsequent estimation.
and sludge organic matter content, resulting in insufficient systematic Construction and operation data in 2020 were collected for 8986
analysis of emission reduction strategies. WWTPs nationwide in China (Fig. S1, Table S1), obtained from pollution
In the face of global challenge regarding environmental pollution source statistics and field survey. The dataset included the locations,
and climate change, the synergy between pollution control and GHGs designed capacity, treated wastewater volume, influent and effluent
mitigation, along with the cost-effective strategies thereby arising, has water quality, receiving waterbody, mass of sludge and disposal
garnered considerable attention (Adnan et al., 2024; Santis et al., 2024; methods, which were used to calculate methane emissions from treat-
Yimrattanabovorn et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2022a). The Action Plan for ment, discharge and sludge disposal sectors for each individual WWTP.
Methane Emission Control, issued in 2023, emphasized the necessity of As for WWTPs processing mixed municipal and industrial wastewater,
coordinating methane emission mitigation with water pollutant control domestic wastewater volume was used following the suggestions from
(MEE, 2023). However, within the wastewater system, the potential IPCC (IPCC, 2019). Information for sewers in 328 cities (prefecture-level
synergies remain underexplored and poorly understood. Existing studies cities and municipality) was derived from China Urban Construction
mainly focused on single aspects of wastewater pollution control or GHG Statistical Yearbook in the same year to calculate methane emission from
emission reduction, with proposed strategies lacking sufficient integra- sewers in each prefecture-level city. Pollutant generation rates from
tion to achieve dual goals. Strategies aiming at decarbonizing the urban populations for different regions were adopted from The Hand-
wastewater system emphasized energy saving and recovery through book of Coefficients in the Second Pollution Sources Census. Other statistical
technological innovation as a key measure towards carbon reduction data, such as annual rainfall and urban population, was collected from
(Hall et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024; Zheng and Lam, China Statistical Yearbook. Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) was used in
2024), but without targeted pollution control benefits. Nevertheless, the this study as an indicator of mass change of organic carbon in municipal
2

--- Page 3 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
Fig. 1. Study boundary and logistic figure. Emissions from wastewater collection sector, including sewers and uncollected wastewater, were estimated for cities.
Emissions from WWTPs, treated effluent discharge and sludge disposal were calculated at firm-level.
wastewater. CH4,i: total methane emission from wastewater system in the ith city
(Mg/y)
2.2. Determination of EF values CH4SW,i, CH4UCL,i: methane emissions caused by organic carbon
degradation in sewer network and uncollected wastewater in the ith
The choice of EFs, which represent the amount of methane emission city (Mg/y)
generated from various activities for each kilogram of pollutant treated CH4TR,i,j, CH4EF,i,j: methane emission from treatment process and
or discharged, significantly impacts emission calculation result in terms effluent discharge in the jth WWTPs in the ith city (Mg/y)
of scientific validity and accuracy. Localized EF values have been widely CH4LF,i,j,CH4IN,i,j,CH4CP,i,j: methane emission from landfill, incinera-
reported for optimization based on case studies and field monitoring, tion and composting by sludge from the jth WWTPs in the ith city
which however exhibited substantial inconsistencies due to diverse (Mg/y)
emission sources and monitoring methods. To determine credible EF
values for this study, localized data from studies (Aboobakar et al., 2013; Emissions from sewage collection sector. The total amount of
Bao et al., 2016; Hwang et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2014; Masuda et al., COD production from urban population was estimated firstly. The mass
2018; Qi et al., 2019; Ren et al., 2013; Schneider et al., 2015; Schouten of organic carbon degraded or lost within the collection system was
et al., 2014; Tumendelger et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2011; Yan et al., quantified by the difference between the mass of COD generated and
2014) were collected and categorized by wastewater management collected by municipal WWTPs.
sector and particular scenario involved, e.g. specific wastewater treat-
TOWGN,i=POPUR,i×CODGN,i×365×10(cid:0)6
ment process (Table S2). Probability distribution analysis by Monte (2)
Carlo simulation, employed from Du et al. (2023), was performed to
obtain the EF value for calculation (Fig. S2, Table S3). Considering the TOWCL,i =TOWGN,i(cid:0) TOWIF,i (3)
limited samples size of EFs reported for several wastewater treatment
where:
processes, discharge sector and sludge disposal sector, which lack sta-
tistical significance, default values were adopted to avoid data bias
(Tables S3–5). TOWGN,i: mass of COD in domestic wastewater generated by urban
population in ith city (t COD/y)
POPUR,i: urban population in ith city (persons)
2.3. Methane emission estimation from each sector
CODGN,i: per capita COD generation rates in ith city (g/capita⋅d)
Total emissions from the whole process of wastewater system. 10(cid:0)6: converting factor for gram to ton
Total methane emissions included emissions from wastewater collec- TOWCL,i: mass loss of COD through wastewater collection system (t
tion, treatment, discharge and sludge disposal, further divided into COD/y)
seven sub-sectors: TOWIF,i: annually influent mass of organic matter mass in all WWTPs
in the ith city (t COD/y)
CH4,i=CH4SW,i+CH4UCL,i
∑m (cid:0) ) For methane emission caused by organic matter degraded in sewers,
+ CH4TR,i,j+CH4EF,i,j+CH4LF,i,j+CH4IN,i,j+CH4CP,i,j (1)
empirical equation derived from SewEx model (Foley et al., 2008; Foley
j=1
et al., 2009) was applied for estimation.
[ ( ) ]
where, CH4SW,i= 5.24*10(cid:0)5× 4 d×HRTi +0.0015 ×Qi×365×10(cid:0)3 (4)
3

--- Page 4 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
where: CH4EF,i,j=TOWEF,i,j×EFEF,i,j (10)
d: average diameter of sewage pipeline (m), valued 0.6 m according TOWEF,i,j=CODEF,i,j*Qi,j×365×10(cid:0)6 (11)
to the construction standards for sewage pipelines in China
HRTi: average hydraulic retention time of wastewater in sewer where:
network in the ith city (h)
Qi: flow rate in sewer network in the ith city (m3/d) TOWEF,i,j: organic matter mass discharged through treated effluents
5.24*10(cid:0)5: empirical rate of methanogenic activity of pipeline bio- by the jth WWTPs in the ith city (t/year)
film (kg/m(cid:0) 2⋅h) (Foley et al., 2008, 2009) EFEF,i,j: EF for the specific discharge pathway for effluents in the jth
0.0015: average residual concentration of dissolved methane in raw WWTP in ith city (Table S4)
wastewater (kg/m(cid:0) 3) (Foley et al., 2009)
10(cid:0)3: converting factor for kilogram to megagram Emissions from sewage sludge disposal. For most landfills, solid
waste (including sludge) is deposited continuously throughout the year
The mass of organic matter in uncollected wastewater was estimated with a delay time for methane production after deposition. To facilitate a
based on the difference between the total mass loss within the waste- comparative assessment of the cumulative emission impacts across
water collection system and the mass of degraded organic matter. Given various sludge disposal approaches, assumption for complete sludge
the uncertainty of discharge pathways of uncollected wastewater, degradation and methane release in landfills within a one-year time-
default value was adopted for the EFs (IPCC, 2019). frame was employed. According to IPCC (2019)Vol.5 Ch.3, the equation
( )
is as follows.
TOWUCL,i=TOWCL,i (cid:0) C 0H .4 25sw,i (5)
16
CH4LF,i,j=SLF,i,j×DOCi,j×DOCf×MCF×F× 12×(1(cid:0) RLF)×(1(cid:0) OX)
CH4UCL,i=TOWUCL,i×EFUCL (6) (12)
where: where:
TOWUCL,i: organic matter mass of uncollected sewage (t COD/y) SLF,i,j: dry mass of sludge deposited in landfills from the jth WWTPs in
EFUCL: EF for wastewater discharge into aquatic environments (kg the ith city
CH4/kg COD), adopted 0.028 from IPCC (2019)(Table S4) DOCi,j: fraction of degradable organic carbon in sludge from the jth
0.25: default value of methane producing capacity for domestic WWTPs in the ith city, valued 30 % for WWTPs adopted with
wastewater (IPCC, 2019) anaerobic sludge digestion and 50 % for WWTPs without sludge
treatment practices
Emissions from wastewater treatment sector. IPCC equations DOCf: fraction of DOC that can decompose (Table S5)
based on EF was adopted from Vol.5 Ch.2 (IPCC, 2019). To reflect the MCF: methane correction factor (Table S5)
differential impacts of emissions from various treatment processes, the F: fraction of methane in landfill gas (Table S5)
EFs corresponding to the specific processes of individual wastewater OX: oxidation factor (Table S5)
treatment plants were employed for the calculation (Table S3). 16/12: molecular weight ratio of CH4/C
CH4TR,i,j=(cid:0) TOWTR,i,j(cid:0) SCOD,i,j) ×EFTR,i,j(cid:0) RTR,i,j (7) dR eLF fa: ur le tc eo sv tie mry tr ea ote ro ef om ve et rh ya en fe ci in nl ca yn d afi nl dl s f, cv ia lil tu ye d 2 v0 a% eb ia ns e Cd io nn
a f c fi e a co er g h a
TOWTR,i,j=(cid:0) CODIF,i,j(cid:0) CODEF,i,j) ×Qi,j×365×10(cid:0)6 (8) (Table S5)
Based on IPCC (2019)Vol.5 Ch.5, the equation for emissions from
SCOD,i,j=Si,j×Ri,j×1.42 (9)
sludge incineration is as follows:
where: CH4IN,i,j=SIN,i,j×EFIN (13)
TOWTR,i,j: mass of organic matter removed by the treatment process where:
in jth WWTPs in the ith city (t COD/y)
SCOD,i,j: COD removed in the form of sludge in the jth WWTP in ith SIN,i,j: wet mass of sludge for incineration from the jth WWTPs in the
city (t COD/y) ith city (t), converted from dry wet by assuming a moisture content of
Si,j: mass of dry sludge in the jth WWTP in ith city (t/y) 60 % in wet sludge (IPCC, 2006) to align with the EFIN on a
Ri,j: fraction of organic component in dry sludge in the jth WWTP in wet-weight basis
ith city (%) EFIN: methane EF for waste incineration (kg CH4/10(cid:0) 6 kg waste on wet
1.42: converting coefficient between organic component and COD in weight basis), utilizing the default value for continuous incineration
dry sludge (kg COD/kg sludge) (CAEPI, 2022) stoker (IPCC, 2019) due to the extensive use of grate incinerators in
EFTR,i,j: EF for the specific treatment process in the jth WWTP in ith China (Table S5)
city (kg CH4/kg COD) (Table S3)
RTR,i,j: mass of recovered methane in the jth WWTP in ith city WWTP According to IPCC (2006) Vol.5 Ch.4, the equation for methane
(Mg), which was regarded as 0 in China emissions from biological treatment is as follows:
CH4CP,i,j=SCP,i,j×EFCP(cid:0) RCP (14)
CODIF,i,j, CODEF,i,j: influent and effluent COD concentration of the jth
WWTP in ith city (mg/L). where:
Emissions from wastewater discharge sector. Equations were
adopted based on IPCC (2019) Vol.5 Ch.2. EFs corresponding to the SCP,i,j: dry mass of sludge for composting from the jth WWTPs in the
specific discharge pathways of each WWTP were selected to ensure ac- ith city (t)
curate quantification (Table S4).
4

--- Page 5 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
EFCP: methane EF for composting on a dry weight basis (kg CH4/kg pollutant reduction and methane emission. The scale category included
waste on dry weight basis) (Table S5) large, medium and small cities, with urban populations above 3 million,
RCP: total amount of methane recovered in inventory year (Mg), between 1 and 3 million, and below 1 million.
regarded as 0 in China
3. Results
2.4. Technical validation
3.1. Total methane emissions from wastewater system
The emission factor methodology, commonly used to estimate
emissions, may introduce uncertainties due to variations in the values of In 2020, the total methane emission in China’s municipal wastewater
EFs. To confirm the robustness of emission estimates, both sensitivity system is 911 Gg. Fig. 2A displays the distribution characteristics of
analysis and uncertainty analysis were employed. Specifically, consid- methane emissions across 328 cities. While the mean value of citywide
ering the independent variability of EFs across different sectors and emissions is 2778.4 Mg, the standard deviation reaches 3280.2 Mg,
process, One-At-a-Time (OAT) sensitivity analysis method were applied exhibiting large regional differences. A clear dividing line can be
to observe the changes in total emissions when the values of EFs varied observed in Fig. 2A between cities with relative larger or smaller
within a ±20 % range, thereby identifying the most sensitive factors emissions, which is essentially consistent with the Hu Huanyong Line,
influencing the overall emission estimates. To further demonstrate the the demographic dividing line of China. The estimated emission on the
reliability of the results, the uncertainty propagation method was uti- southeast side of the line is 3054 Mg on average, which is almost 2.5
lized to quantify the uncertainty in total emissions, based on the times greater than average emission among cities on the northwest side
inherent uncertainties of the EFs. For comparison, emissions and asso- of the line (1246.0 Mg). Shanghai, Guangzhou, Chongqing, Beijing and
ciated uncertainties using IPCC default values were calculated to pro- Shenzhen are the five cities with the largest total emission above 13,000
vide a comprehensive validation framework. Mg, which are also among the most populous cities in China. The city
with the lowest emission is Sansha, which is an island city with a limited
2.5. Correlation between pollutant mitigation and methane emission population capacity due to its small land area.
The national average per capita emission reaches 1.13 kg while the
In China, the wastewater treatment rate among cities reached 97.53 standard deviation is 0.41 kg, suggesting the dispersion of emission data
% in 2020 (MOHURD, 2021), suggesting that wastewater can be well is reduced after excluding the effect of citywide population size. Fig. 2B
treated and discharged in compliance with standards once collected. shows the geographic distribution of per capita emission in cities, which
However, sewer deficiencies, overflow and infiltration cause loss in shows similar but opposite distribution patterns compared to the total
pollutants entering the WWTPs (Liao et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2021), emission. The average per capita emission among the cities on the
which end up discharging into aquatic environment, and can be indi- northwest side of Hu Huanyong Line is 1.34 kg, while that on the
cated by the wastewater collection rate. In this study, the wastewater southeast side is 1.09 kg. The highest emission intensity is observed in
collection rate was defined as an indicator of pollutant reduction in the Sichuan Basin and the Inner Mongolia Plateau while cities with the
wastewater systems, representing the proportion of water pollutants (in lowest per capita emission distribute unevenly in North China Plain and
form of COD) captured by centralized wastewater treatment systems. South Coastal Region.
The regression relationship between the wastewater collection rate and
per capita methane emissions from wastewater sector (collection, 3.2. Methane emissions from sectors
treatment, discharge) was analyzed, both at the national level and across
cities of different scales, in order to discover the correlations between On national scale, the wastewater collection sector is the largest
Fig. 2. Total CH4 emissions and per capita CH4 emissions in 2020 in China. (A)Total CH4 emissions from municipal wastewater systems in each city; (B) per
capita CH4 emissions from municipal wastewater systems in each city.
5

--- Page 6 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
contributor (517 Gg) to total methane emissions, accounting for 56.8 % exhibit no discernible correlation, both in terms of total and per capita
of total emissions. In this sector, 43.4 % of emissions is generated by emissions. For wastewater sector, the average share of emissions from
microbial degradation in sewer network. Emissions from uncollected the wastewater collection sector is 85.8 % among 31 provinces, implying
wastewater account for more than half of emissions within the sector, a dominate role of emission contribution in wastewater sector for all
and 32.2 % of the total emissions, which is an unexpectedly significant provinces. In the context of the sludge sector, the mean proportion of
contributor. The sludge disposal sector is the second-greatest contrib- emissions attributable to sludge landfilling across all provinces reaches
utor (315 Gg), accounting for 34.6 % of total emissions. It is noteworthy 89.2 %, which emphasizes the pronounced influence of sludge land-
that emissions from WWTPs and treated effluents, which are mostly filling practice on the overall emission of the sludge treatment process.
studied by scholars and included in national emission inventories, only
accounted for 8.6 % together of the system-wide emissions, which is
relatively small contributors. 3.3. Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
In Fig. 3, methane emissions from the four sectors are presented to
further explore spatial composition differences. Fig. 3A–D displays Emissions from each sector demonstrated varying degrees of sensi-
citywide emission from four sectors with the same color scale. Most tivity to changes in respective EFs (Fig. S3). Specifically, the sludge
cities have greater emissions from wastewater collection and sludge disposal sector exhibits notable sensitivity (±18.5 % change) to EF for
disposal rather than WWTPs and effluent discharging, which are landfills, while the wastewater collection sector is highly sensitive
consistent with the nationwide pattern. In particular, wastewater (±11.3 % change) to EF for uncollected wastewater. Similarly, the
collection sector is the dominant emission contributor in East, Central, wastewater treatment and discharge stage are sensitive (±11.0 % and
South China and Southern West, with the highest share of 79 % found in ±11.1 % change) to EF for anaerobic biological methods and discharge
South China. In North China, Northern West and Northern East regions, pathways into stagnant drainage ditches respectively. The significance
the most significant source of methane emissions is sludge disposal of sensitivities can be attributed to the high emission contribution of
sector, with the highest share of 63 % occurring in the Northern West these practices to sector emission (weighing 92 %, 57 %, 56 %, and 49 %
region. Only a few cities present noticeable emissions in treatment respectively). The total emissions are most sensitive (±6.4 % change) to
sector, such as Harbin, Qingdao, Wenzhou, and Hengyang. the EFs of untreated wastewater and sludge landfilling, both of which
Fig. 4presents methane emissions from wastewater and sludge sec- are determined on IPCC default values owing to the absence of localized
tors separately at inter-provincial level. Emissions from the two sectors parameters. The uncertainty of total emissions based on localized EFs is
(cid:0) 66 %–112 %, narrower than uncertainty derived from IPCC ((cid:0) 68 %–
Fig. 3. Distribution of emissions by sector. Including total CH4 emissions from four sectors at prefecture-city level in 2020. (A) CH4 emissions in municipal
wastewater collection sector; (B) CH4 emissions in municipal wastewater treatment sector; (C) CH4 emissions in municipal wastewater discharge sector; (D) CH4
emissions in municipal sludge disposal sector; (E) relative contributions of four sectors for seven regions. See Table S6for the composition of seven regions.
6

--- Page 7 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
Fig. 4. Emissions by province. Total and per capita CH4 emissions from wastewater and sludge sector, and their composition, at a provincial level. See Table S6for
abbreviation.
114 %) (Table S7). In particular for the wastewater treatment sector, the in the methane emissions from the wastewater sector (Fig. 6B). This
application of localized EFs results in a substantially reduced uncer- opposite pattern is prevalent in large, medium and small cities grouped
tainty range of (cid:0) 47 %–55 %, compared with the broader range of (cid:0) 75 by urban population (Fig. 6C–E). The linear relationship between
%–151 % obtained using IPCC methodology. collection rate and per capita emission in medium sized cities exhibits
the largest slope, while the smallest slope is observed in large sized
cities, indicating different degrees of carbon emission sensitiveness to-
3.4. Methane emission intensity vs. wastewater collection rate wards change in urban wastewater infrastructure.
The average methane emission per unit of organic carbon reduction 4. Discussion
in wastewater systems across China is 0.13 kg CH4/kg COD, exhibiting
significant variability among cities with values fluctuating between 4.1. Comparison to other studies
0.02 kg CH4/kg COD and 0.73 kg CH4/kg COD. To further clarify the
relationship between system pollution mitigation and emissions in- Existing studies on methane emissions from wastewater systems
tensity, Fig. 5shows the spatial coupling of wastewater collection rates have been conducted at the enterprise, city, province and national level.
and methane emissions per capita from the wastewater sector on a city- However in most cases the current estimation results are not comparable
by-city basis. A clear trend is revealed that in regions with higher per (Table S10). The use of different system boundaries across studies is one
capita emissions (e.g. the southeast area compared to northwest re- of the main reasons for the difference (Chaosakul et al., 2014; Peng
gions), the collection rates are relatively lower. et al., 2016). China’s second biennial update report on climate change in
The regional data highlight similar correlation (Fig. 6A): in the 2014 and some studies that measured total methane emissions from both
Northern China, Northern East, and Northern West area, higher collec- industrial and domestic wastewater treatment processes had a larger
tion rates are observed ranging from 55 % to 63 %, while per capita emission estimation result. Most recent studies were conducted on
emissions tend to be lower. In contrast, the Central, Southern, and WWTPs and treated effluent discharges, and their estimated emissions
Southern West regions exhibit the opposite trend, with lower sewage (ranged from 2.9 Gg to 139 Gg) are generally consistent with the
collection rates and higher per capita emissions. Statistically, a 1 % in- emissions of 78 Gg corresponding to same sectors in this study. The use
crease in wastewater collection rate is correlated with a 0.38 % decrease
7

--- Page 8 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
Fig. 5. Distribution of wastewater collection rate and CH4 emissions (kg per capita) in wastewater sector.
of methane EFs and measurement methods is another major factor 4.2. Major contributors and regional differences
contributing to variation (Xu et al., 2018). The IPCC-recommended
methane EFs, which is often used for calculations, is 2.8–14.4 times The total emissions result indicates the sewage collection sector and
larger compared to the localized methane EFs used in studies (Liu et al., the sludge disposal sector are the two primary sources of methane
2014; Wang et al., 2011; Yan et al., 2014). Earlier studies based on IPCC emissions across the whole wastewater management process. The dif-
2006algorithm directly multiplies the amount of COD removed by the ferences in emission contributions among regions might be highly
methane EFs, while recent studies adopted the updated IPCC 2019al- correlated with the specific variations in local practices.
gorithm eliminated the organic components removed in the form of This finding reveals sludge treatment emerges as the predominant
sludge from the treated COD amount. As IPCC has not provided a rec- source of methane emissions in the Northern China, Northern East, and
ommended formula for methane emissions estimation in sewers, the Northern West regions, further clarifies regional differences based on
uncertainty use of different empirical formulas is also one of the key prior research (Zhou et al., 2023). The emissions in the sludge disposal
reasons for the discrepancies in the study results. Other objective factors sector are likely correlated with disposal method selection (Chu et al.,
also contribute to the non-comparability of the results of studies, such as 2024; Zhao et al., 2023) and sludge yield coefficient (Rong et al., 2023).
sample size, data source and year of inventory (Yan et al., 2019; Zhang The proportion of landfilling sludge in the Northern East, Northern
and Chen, 2014). West, and Northern China regions averages 66 %, with typical provinces
It is noteworthy that urban septic tanks, as a potential source of such as Gansu and Qinghai exhibiting a landfill proportion exceeding 80
methane, were excluded from the research boundary. Based on litera- %, resulting in a methane emission share as high as 95 %. In contrast,
ture estimates (CUWA, 2024), urban septic tanks could contribute 273.3 other regions have an average landfill proportion of only 38 %
Gg methane emissions in China annually, representing 30 % of the total (Table S11). However, the average sludge yield coefficient in the
emissions from the whole municipal wastewater system in this study. Northern East, Northern West, and Northern China regions is 0.68 kg dry
Studies have reported that methane emissions from septic tanks are at sludge/kg COD reduced, smaller than the mean value of 0.85 kg dry
the same level as GHG emissions from WWTPs (Cheng et al., 2022; sludge/kg COD in other regions (Table S11). This discrepancy may be
Zhang et al., 2021), while this study further highlighted methane attributed to the higher proportion of sludge landfilling in the northern
emissions from septic tanks are comparable to methane emissions from regions, where the increased emissions from landfilling outweigh the
sludge disposal sector (315 Gg), simultaneously reach 3.5 times the reduction in emissions resulting from lower sludge yields.
methane emissions of WWTPs and treated effluents, corroborating urban In southern regions including Eastern, Central, Southern China and
septic tanks to be a significant source of methane emissions within Southern West, sewage collection is the major source of emissions, and
municipal wastewater system. emission pattern is divided by the Hu Huanyong Line, corroborating the
conclusions of previous studies (Zhu et al., 2024). These regions, being
closer to the equator, had an average temperature of 18.0 ◦C in 2020,
8

--- Page 9 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
Fig. 6. Linear correlation between wastewater collection rate and CH4 emissions (kg per capita). (A) comparison of average wastewater collection rate and
CH4 emissions in seven regions in China. See Table S5for abbreviation. (B) Changes of CH4 emission with wastewater collection rate in 328 cities. (C) in large cities
with urban population over 3 million; (D) in medium-size cities with urban population range from 1 to 3 million; (E) in small cities with urban population less than 1
million. Wastewater collection rate is divided into 23 groups, with each data point representing an average value of a certain city group. The number of cities in each
group used for analysis is shown in Tables S8 and S9.
while high temperature is proven to be an important cause of high sewer networks remained neglected (Huang et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
methane production rates (Liu et al., 2015b), compared to the northern 2022b). In general, a higher wastewater collection rate indicates sound
regions with an average annual temperature of only 8.8 ◦C (Table S12). urban planning and greater investment in infrastructure, leading to
A positive correlation of emissions with per capita GDP is also observed. robust facilities and rational management practices. These factors
In the southern regions with more coastal developed cities, the average collectively contribute to reduced methane emissions from wastewater
regional per capita GDP reaches 64,000 yuan, slightly higher than the systems. To clarify the key factors affecting wastewater collection rate
52,000 yuan in the northern regions (Table S12), as the increased con- and methane emissions, Pearson correlation of representative indicators
sumption of food and water in high-income areas might cause more among wastewater system practices were displayed (Fig. 7), providing
burden for sewers (Zhu et al., 2024). In terms of HRT, the mean value in an in-depth exploration of the negative correlation.
the southern regions is 8.05 h, while the northern regions have a slightly Sewer network management. Both wastewater collection rate (r =
lower average of 7.72 h (Table S12). Longer HRTs is considered to lead 0.61, p ≤0.001) and methane emission (r =(cid:0) 0.42, p ≤0.001) exhibit
to longer retention times, providing better growth conditions for strong but opposite correlations with WWTP influent COD concentra-
methanogens (Guisasola et al., 2008, 2009; Sharma et al., 2013; Song tion, suggesting the primary cause of this negative correlation. Low
et al., 2023). influent COD concentrations indicate inefficient wastewater collection
and infiltration of extraneous water (e.g. groundwater, rainwater) in
sewers, which may be caused by improper combined sewer systems,
4.3. Synergy between pollutant mitigation and methane emission
mismatch of stormwater pipelines, or lack of pipeline maintenance (Liao
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2022b; Zhu et al., 2024), leading to the leakage
A linear negative correlation between the wastewater collection
of organic matter into the external environment and additional methane
rates and methane emission intensities in city-level was found in this
emissions. Simultaneously, the infiltration of extraneous water dilutes
study. China has experienced rapid scale growth of urban wastewater
the wastewater concentration, resulting in high water levels, reduced
treatment facilities, while the importance of proper maintenance of
9

--- Page 10 ---
H. Gao et al. J o u r n a l o f C l e a n e r P r o d u c t i o n 509 (2025) 145592
Fig. 7. Correlation among urban wastewater infrastructure indicators, wastewater collection rate and methane emissions. WCR, wastewater collection rate;
CH4, methane emissions per capita; CODIF, average COD concentration in WWTP influents; PR, annual precipitation; CTR, wastewater treatment capacity per capita;
QTR, treated wastewater volume per capita; LRTR, average load rate in WWTPs; LSW, total length of sewer pipelines; POPD, population density by urban population per
area. Significance signs for correlation coefficients are marked in the circles. * means p <0.05, ** means p <0.01, *** means p <0.001.
flow velocity, extended hydraulic retention times in the sewers, which emissions. For urban margins and undeveloped districts with less pop-
collectively increase the potential for methane emissions within the ulation, increasing sewer coverage with construction of small-sized
pipelines (Chen et al., 2024; Guisasola et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2015b; Zhu treatment facilities may be necessary to prevent long-distance sewage
et al., 2024). Overflow in rainy areas may also intensify the decrease of transportation (Zhu et al., 2024).
COD concentration (Bizer and Kirchhoff, 2022), which could be further The wastewater collection rates and methane emission intensities of
reinforced by the negative correlation between precipitation and large, medium, and small-sized cities all show a linear negative corre-
influent COD concentration (r =(cid:0) 0.45, p ≤0.001). lation, but with different slopes. The largest slope is observed in
Wastewater treatment practices. Both per capita wastewater treatment medium-sized cities, indicating the greatest potential to reduce emission
capacity (r = (cid:0) 0.16, p ≤ 0.001) and per capita treated wastewater intensity by increasing wastewater collection rate in cities with urban
volume (r =0.55, p ≤0.001) were correlated with wastewater collection population between 1 million to 3 million. These cities are generally
rate, but neither indicators showed significant correlation with methane boomtowns experiencing sharp economic expansion and fast-growing
emissions (p >0.05). It can be inferred that cities with higher waste- public services (Sun et al., 2017), where WWTPs have been signifi-
water collection rates have implemented appropriate wastewater system cantly increased and advanced technologies applied over past decades.
planning, focusing on fully utilizing existing treatment facilities rather This high efficiency in wastewater treatment system leads to lower
than on excessive construction of treatment capacity. This observation emission intensity when collection rate is high. As a comparison, the
aligned with the positive correlation between wastewater collection rate relatively higher emission intensities in large and small cities are
and average load rate of WWTPs (r =0.14, p ≤0.05). Notably, a high observed with high collection rate. Among them, large cities obtain
wastewater collection rate can reduce the methane emissions from un- higher methane emission intensity from WWTPs and treated effluents,
treated wastewater but theoretically increase the amount of organic probably due to dietary habits differences in well-developed cities,
matter entering WWTPs, potentially leading to higher methane emis- which have a greater amount of organic carbon entering treatment
sions from treatment process. However, methane emission displayed no system. Small cities have larger methane emission intensity from sewer
significant correlation with treated wastewater volume, indicating that network degradation, as the low urban population density and low
the emission reduction benefits of increased collection rates outweighed frequency of sewer maintenance in small cities may have an impact on
the increased emissions from treatment process. This deduction was higher emission.
consistent with the extensive use of aerobic treatment processes in
China, which have high pollutant reduction efficiency and relatively low
4.4. Implications and limitations
methane emission intensity.
Sewer coverage and population distribution. Sewer pipeline length was
positively correlated with wastewater collection rates (r = 0.28, p ≤ This study further demonstrates that wastewater collection and
0.001) but also with methane emission intensity (r =0.21, p ≤0.001). sludge treatment sectors are significant yet unmanaged sources of
methane emissions in China’s wastewater systems. Given the substantial
While the sewer networks construction is an effective way to enhance
climate impact of methane emissions, multi-objective control in water
wastewater collection rates, longer pipelines may also increase HRT in
pollutant reduction and carbon mitigation should be considered in the
sewers, leading to higher methane emissions. As population density
showed positive correlation with wastewater collection rates (r =0.27, future urbanization process.
p ≤0.001) but no significant correlation with methane emissions (p > The negative correlation between wastewater collection rates and
methane emissions in China suggests a feasible opportunity to integrate
0.05), it was deduct that sewer network extension by branch sewer
climate co-benefits into municipal wastewater systems. It is recom-
construction could effectively improve wastewater collection rates in
mended that urban management authorities implement regulatory pol-
densely populated areas while avoiding excessive increases in methane
icies and engineering measures to systematically enhance wastewater
10