--- Page 1 ---
WaterResearchX13(2021)100122
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Water Research X
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/water-research-x
Estimation of countrywide N O emissions from wastewater treatment in
2
Switzerland using long-term monitoring data
Wenzel Grubera,b,*, Luzia von Ka¨ nelb, Liliane Vogta,b, Manuel Lucka,b, Lucien Biolleyb,
Kilian Fellera, Andrin Moosmanna, Nikita Kra¨ henbühla, Marco Kipfa, Reto Looslib,
Michael Vogelb, Eberhard Morgenrotha,b, Daniel Braunb, Adriano Jossa
aEawag, Swiss Federal Institute for Aquatic Science and Technology, 8600 Duebendorf, Switzerland
bInstitute of Environmental Engineering, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland
A B S T R A C T
Nitrous oxides (N2O) emissions contribute to climate change and stratospheric ozone depletion. Wastewater treatment is an important, yet likely underestimated,
source of N2O emissions, as recent, long-term monitoring campaigns have demonstrated. However, the available data are insufficient to representatively estimate
countrywide emission due to the brevity of most monitoring campaigns. This study showed that the emission estimates can be significantly improved using an
advanced approach based on multiple continuous, long-term monitoring campaigns. In monitoring studies on 14 full-scale wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), we
found a strong variability in the yearly emission factors (EFs) (0.1 to 8% of the incoming nitrogen load) which exhibited a good correlation with effluent nitrite. But
countrywide data on nitrite effluent concentrations is very limited and unavailable for emission estimation in many countries. Hence, we propose a countrywide
emission factor calculated from the weighted EFs of three WWTP categories (carbon removal, EF: 0.1–8%, nitrification only: 1.8%, and full nitrogen removal: 0.9%).
However, EF of carbon removal WWTPs are still highly uncertain given the expected variability in performance.
The newly developed approach allows representative, country-specific estimations of the N2O emissions from WWTP. Applied to Switzerland, the estimations
result in an average EF of 0.9 to 3.6% and total emissions of 410 to 1690 tN2O-N/year, which corresponds to 0.3–1.4% of the total greenhouse gas emissions in
Switzerland. Our results demonstrate that better data availability and an improved understanding of long-term monitoring campaigns is crucial to improve current
emission estimations. Finally, our results confirm several measures to mitigate N2O emissions from wastewater treatment; year-round denitrification, limiting nitrite
accumulation, and stringent control of sludge age in carbon removal plants.
Introduction the side-stream treatment for reject water from the sludge lines (Joss
et al., 2009; Kampschreur et al., 2008b). Emissions of N2O produced on
Nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions contribute substantially to climate WWTPs can occur either on site or in receiving waters if dissolved N2O is
change (IPCC 2014) and stratospheric ozone depletion (Ravishankara discharged (Mikola et al., 2014; Marescaux et al., 2018). However,
et al., 2009). The atmospheric N2O concentration is expected to rise roughly 80% of the N2O emissions from WWTPs are released in the
until the middle of the 21st century (Tian et al., 2020). Wastewater aerated zone of biological treatment (Baeten et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
treatment plants (WWTPs) and their N2O production are currently often 2019).
underestimated emission processes in national greenhouse gas (GHG) Quantifying representative EFs at the biological stage of WWTPs
inventories. Estimations of countrywide N2O emissions are based on requires continuous long-term monitoring campaigns due to the sub-
assumed emission factors (EFs). EFs in the standard reporting guidelines stantial daily variation and seasonality of emissions (Daelman et al.,
are much lower (0.03% to 0.14%; Daelman et al., 2015, IPCC 2006) than 2013). A strong seasonal emission pattern with high emission in spring
reported long-term full-scale measurements. With the refinement of the and low emissions in autumn was previously shown in several long-term
IPCC methodology in 2019, increased EFs of 0.01% to 2.9% appeared in monitoring campaigns (Gujer, 2020). However, only six continuous
the reporting guidelines (IPCC 2019). monitoring campaigns of at least one year’s duration have been reported
In wastewater treatment, N2O formation is primarily caused by to our knowledge (Chen et al., 2019; Daelman et al., 2015, Gruber et al.
biological nitrogen removal through nitrification and denitrification 2020, Kosonen et al., 2016). Five of these studies were conducted in
(Kampschreur et al., 2009). The main production processes are the temperate climates, with a monthly mean temperature of over 10 ◦C
biological stage in the water lines of WWTPs (Kosonen et al., 2016) and during 4–7 months (Belda et al. 2014). The EF assessed (0.8–2.9% of the
* Corresponding author.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wroa.2021.100122
Received 9 April 2021; Received in revised form 24 September 2021; Accepted 24 September 2021
Availableonline30September2021
2589-9147/©2021TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

--- Page 2 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
total nitrogen loads) were shown to be substantially higher than those Central monitoring station
found by many short-term campaigns (Chen et al., 2019; Daelman et al.,
3-way valves
2015, Gruber et al. 2020, Kosonen et al., 2016, Vasilaki et al., 2019). The
causes of the wide range of EFs assessed are still unknown (Vasilaki
Pre-treatment
et al., 2019). Hence, we conclude that additional online long-term
and protection Analyzer
monitoring campaigns are much needed to better characterize the
variability from N2O emissions in full-scale WWTPs. Ultimately, a broad PLC
data basis is crucial for countrywide assessment of the N2O EFs from
wastewater treatment. Purging pump
Various approaches have been suggested for the extrapolation of N2O
emissions from WWTPs at countrywide level (Ramirez-Melgarejo et al.,
2020). The standard approach is described by the IPCC guidelines (IPCC
2006), which are designed to be calculated with generally accessible
variables. Consequently, the approach leads to high uncertainties of the
total emission estimates for two reasons. Firstly, in a top-down
approach, the nitrogen load to WWTPs is estimated from a country’s
protein consumption, resulting in substantial differences compared to a
bottom-up approach, using measured nitrogen influent loads to WWTPs
(Ramirez-Melgarejo et al., 2020). Secondly, the IPCC guidelines suggest Biological treatment
a uniform EF independent of the type of WWTP (IPCC 2006). The
assumption of a uniform EF leads to high uncertainties, due to the wide
Fig. 1. Schematic overview of the monitoring setups applied. Blue, dotted line
range of EFs reported for different types of WWTPs (Cadwallader and indicates all elements within central monitoring station. PLC: programmable
Van Briesen 2017) and poorly described key factors characterizing N2O logical controller.
EFs (Vasilaki et al., 2019). Several methods have been suggested to
overcome these shortcomings arising from short-term monitoring cam- cooling to 4 ◦C (JCP SL, JCT, Wiener Neustadt, AUT or TC-Standard
paigns (Ahn et al., 2010; Valkova et al., 2020). However, the integration
(PKE 521), Bühler, Ratingen, GER). To monitor the entire biological
of continuous long-term monitoring campaigns on different process
treatment at multiple sampling points and on various lanes, up to 14
types is needed to obtain the most accurate estimates for countrywide
floating hoods can be connected to our system over three-way valves
N2O EFs.
(Parker Lucifer type 7131KBG2JV00, Cleveland, USA). While one of the
Here, we propose a refined approach to estimating N2O emissions
valves is open to the measurement line, the other channels are purged
from WWTPs based on the EFs of a dozen long-term monitoring cam-
with a pump (ME 2 NT, Vaccubrand, Wertheim, GER) to ensure a con-
paigns on full-scale WWTPs in Switzerland. To acquire a broad data
stant flow through all the tubes. The constant flow is considered
basis, we conducted seven monitoring campaigns of at least one year’s
important for two reasons: (i) to reduce system response time and thus
duration on full-scale WWTPs using an adaptation of the flux chamber
allow fast switching between valves (1 min per measurement) and ii) to
method (Gruber et al. 2020). Additionally, we extracted the same results
avoid freezing of sampling tubes due to humidity in tubing and cold
from seven long-term monitoring campaigns reported in literature
temperatures.
(Daelman et al., 2015; Kosonen et al., 2016, Gruber et al., 2020). We
The system is controlled with a programmable logical controller
used Spearman’s correlation analysis to characterize key variables of a (PLC type WAGO 750–881) which provides two key functions: (i)
WWTP to predict N2O EFs. We use our results to link the variables to switching between the valves, and (ii) analogue–digital signal conver-
patterns detected in our monitoring campaigns to provide experimental
sion and data storage. Key control variables of the system are a flow-
evidence for the correlations found, and we conducted full-scale tests on meter (MEMS flow sensor D6F-10A6–000, Omron, Kyoto, JP) in the
one WWTP to prove concepts from the correlation analysis. Finally, we
sample gas duct, a paramagnetic oxygen sensor in the gas analyser (X-
propose a method for calculating N2O emissions for Switzerland and
stream, Emerson, St. Louis MO, USA), and a humidity sensor (KW1, JCT,
compare it with the methods described in the IPCC guidelines (IPCC
Wiener Neustadt, AUT) after the pre-treatment. The flowmeter allows
2006, 2019) regarding total emissions and corresponding uncertainties.
detection of malfunctioning across the whole system or in specific
channels when the measured flow drops below a set threshold. The
Material & methods oxygen sensor signals substantial leaks in the channel when oxygen
concentration is close to atmospheric concentrations and does not show
Monitoring approach variation. Finally, the humidity sensor is used as a binary sensor. In case
of humidity after the pre-treatment, the measurement is switched off to
N2O emissions were assessed using an adapted version of the flux- prevent the analyser malfunctioning. As a second barrier against water
chamber method as described in Gruber et al. 2020 (Fig. 1). In total, entering the analyser, a protection filter is installed directly after the
five different setups based on the same general concept were applied to pre-treatment. A field computer is used to parametrize the PLC. Addi-
monitor the emission on seven WWTPs (see diagrams in the Supporting tionally, the field computer establishes data transmission to a data
Information: SI). In short, all discontinuously fed reactors were equipped server via the Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) and a 3 G modem
with a flux chamber. On WWTPs with continuously fed lanes, one or (IMON-U300, Insys Icom, Regensburg, GER). On the data server, the
more lanes were monitored, each with three or more flux chambers per monitoring data is processed and synchronized with the operational
lane placed on the aerated compartments. data of the WWTPs and visualized on demand. The operators of the
In contrast to the standard method (Chandran et al., 2016), a WWTPs assessed lab data on concentrations of total nitrogen, nitrogen
chamber (surface: 1 m2) with an open outlet was used, and therefore species, and COD sampled from influent, effluent primary clarifier,
sample gas was not recirculated to the flux chamber after measurement. effluent biological treatment, and effluent WWTP at various intervals.
A sample of the gas flowing through the chamber was diverted at the Operational data on influent flow, air supply, wastewater temperature,
outlet through a tube with a length of up to a few hundred meters to the dissolved oxygen concentrations was acquired over the WWTP’s su-
central monitoring station, where the off-gas was measured in a pervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system. A detailed
non-dispersive infrared analyser (X-stream, Emerson, St. Louis MO, description of the monitoring setup can be found in the SI.
USA). Prior to the measurement, the off-gas was dehumidified by
2

--- Page 3 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
WWTP selection and monitoring campaigns specification provided by the plant operators, ii) by measurement of the
total air flow provided to a treatment lane, or iii) by measurement of the
The seven WWTPs monitored were selected to represent the range of air flow provided to a compartment of the treatment lane. The airflow
nutrient removal goals set and common types of processes installed in was recorded at intervals of 1 min, and emissions were calculated in 1
WWTPs in Switzerland (Table 1). Common removal goals are i) carbon min intervals only for the aerated phases. Emissions from the whole
removal ii) nitrification and iii) denitrification. Common processes treatment plant were extrapolated according to suggestions made in
include various types of activated sludge (AS) systems, such as plug-flow Gruber et al. (2020): when wastewater loadings were expected to differ
(conventional activated sludge (CAS), anoxic-aerobic (AO), anaerobic- or operation strategies to change, all lanes were monitored, but lanes
anoxic-aerobic (A2O)), alternatingly fed intermittently aerated (A/I) with comparable process performance and operation were assumed to
and, sequencing batch reactors (SBR)) and biofilm systems (hybrid fixed emit comparable quantities of N2O.
bed and activated sludge (IFAS), fixed bed (FB)). We sought to represent N2O EFs were calculated with Eq. (1) for the whole duration of the
various types of WWTP size classes (Table 1). Monitoring campaigns monitoring campaigns (Gruber et al. 2020; Aboobakar et al., 2013). For
were conducted over at least 1 year. Flux chambers were placed on lanes the monitoring campaigns that were substantially longer than 1 year (+
in accordance with the monitoring strategy proposed in Gruber et al. 3 months), we evaluated the EFs for all possible data sets of 1 year and
(2020) (see section 2.1 and SI). The monitoring campaigns reported in calculated their average and standard deviation. In the newly conducted
Gruber et al. (2020) were included in the selection. Additionally, data monitoring campaigns of more than 15 months, the yearly average EFs
from three long-term monitoring campaigns of previous studies was did not exhibit substantial variation. EFs always refer to the yearly
included for the statistical analysis of the data (Chen et al., 2019; average influent nitrogen load of the WWTPs calculated based on
Daelman et al., 2015; Kosonen et al., 2016). These studies include data 24-hour composite samples. The samples were taken and analysed by
on one AO process and two carrousel (CARR) activated sludge processes. the operators of the WWTPs every 5 to 14 days. Where nitrogen influent
Detailed information on the WWTPs monitored and the results of the measurements were not available, we estimated the influent nitrogen
newly conducted monitoring campaigns can be found in the SI. load by evaluating a nitrogen mass balance over the primary clarifier
based on typical values for mass flow coefficients from standard text-
books (Gujer 2007; Tchobanoglous et al., 2014), because at least effluent
N2O emission and EF calculation loads of the primary clarifier were available in every case (Figure S3, SI).
All monitoring data and the values for the nitrogen loads can be found in
The net N2O flux for a specific lane was computed with the approach the SI.
presented by Aboobakar et al. (2013) from the airflow supplied to each ∑ ∑ (cid:0) )
reactor section equipped with a flux chamber and the respective N2O EF N2O = 3 d6 =5 1 31 m 64 =4 510 ⋅C NN l2 oO a,m d,d ⋅Qair m,d (1)
concentration. When gaps between two consecutive data points did not daily
le ox nc ge ee rd t3 h0 nm 3in 0, mN2 iO wco en rece en xt cr la ut dio en ds (w see er e l ain be lea r Sl 1y i in nt te hr ep o Sl Ia )t .e Td h; ed a at ia g fla op ws
where EFN2O is the N2O EF [kg N2O–N/kgN], CN2O,m,d is the measured
a n T r
N2O concentration in the off-gas during minute m at day d [kg N2O–N/
supplied to the reactor was estimated with three different methods
m3], Qair,m,d is airflow supplied by the blower of the aeration system of
depending on the WWTP: i) from the blower speed and the blower
the WWTP to reactor surface area representative for a sampling point
during minute m at day d [m3/d], and Nloaddaily is the yearly average
Table 1
nitrogen load per day (kgN/d).
Characteristics of monitored WWTPs and origin of monitoring campaigns used
in this study. Countries: CH, Switzerland; DK, Denmark; NL, the Netherlands; FI,
Finland. Processes: A/I, alternatingly fed and intermittently aerated activated Meta data and correlation analysis
sludge treatment; A2O, anaerobic, anoxic and aerobic cascaded activated sludge
treatment; AO, anoxic and oxic cascaded activated sludge treatment; CARR, The correlation analysis included key figures and performance in-
carrousel activated sludge treatment; CAS, conventional activated sludge; FB, dicators that were collected for each WWTP. Spearman rank correlation
fixed bed biofilm reactor; IFAS, integrated fixed film activated sludge; SBR, was used to study the relationships between variables. The following
sequencing batch reactor.
variables on the design and operation of the WWTPs were included:
WWTP Design size in Process Removal goal Origin design load, process for biological treatment, type of biomass, biological
(country) person reactor volume, aerated volume in biological treatment, non-aerated
equivalent’s (PE)
volume in biological treatment, volume of secondary clarifier (if pre-
Altenrhein 80,000 CAS Nitrification (Gruber sent), nutrient removal goal, aerobic solids retention time (aerobic SRT),
(CH) et al. 2020)
total solids retention time (SRT) and information on post, side-stream
Altenrhein 40,000 FB Nitrification (Gruber
and sludge treatment (fast sand filtration, supernatant treatment type,
(CH) et al. 2020)
Avedore (DK) 350,000 CARR Denitrification (Chen et al., co-digestion). The corresponding data for all WWTPs is available in
2019) Table S1, SI. If possible, we collected and calculated values for the total
Bazenheid 50,000 IFAS Denitrification this study nitrogen and COD loads at the influent and the effluent of the biological
(CH)
treatment and of the WWTPs. Additionally, we collected values on ni-
Birs (CH) 150,000 SBR Denitrification this study (cid:0)
Giubiasco (CH) 100,000 CAS Carbon this study trite (NO2 ) concentration in the effluent of the biological treatment.
removal The input variables for the correlation analysis are summarized in
Hofen (CH) 50,000 AO Denitrification this study Table S2, SI. All statistical calculations were performed using Python
Kralingseveer 360,000 CARR Denitrification (Daelman
programming language (version 3.8.3) (Van Rossum and Drake 2009)
(NL) et al., 2015)
and the Pandas (McKinney 2010), Numpy (Harris et al., 2020), and
Luzern (CH) 280,000 A/I Denitrification (Gruber
et al. 2020) Scipy packages (Virtanen et al., 2020).
Moossee (CH) 50,000 AO Denitrification this study
Scho¨nau (CH) 180,000 A2O Denitrification this study
Full scale tests at the Hofen WWTP
Uster (CH) 50,000 SBR Nitrification (Gruber
et al. 2020)
Vikinma¨kki 840,000 CAS Denitrification (Kosonen We conducted full-scale experiments to compare the effects on N2O
(FI) et al., 2016) emissions of a pre-denitrification zone with those of a fully oxic process
Zurich (CH) 670,000 A/I Denitrification this study
at the Hofen WWTP (see SI for further details). The plant has an AO
3

--- Page 4 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
activated sludge process consisting of six lanes where two lanes use the Table 3
same clarifier and sludge recycle (SI). Every lane consists of three zones Selected values for the estimation of the nitrogen load in Switzerland based on
with an equal size, of which the first zone is typically anoxic. Four of the the IPCC methods (IPCC 2006, 2019).
six lanes were monitored: lane 1–1, lane 2–1, lane 2–2, and lane 3–2. Variable 2006 IPCC guidelines 2019 refinement of the
Whereas lane 2–1 and lane 2–2 share the same secondary clarifier, lane coefficients for IPCC guidelines for
1–1 and lane 3–2 are independent of each other. Between February and Switzerland Switzerland
April 2020, the first of three zones on two lanes (lanes 2–1 and 3–2) were P: Swiss protein consumption 306,000 306,000
fully aerated. The exact dates and durations for each experiment are (t/year)
given in Table 2. FNPR: Nitrogen conten of protein 0.16 0.16
(default value)
(kgN/kg protein)
TPLANT: Connection rate to 97% 97%
Extrapolation to the whole of Switzerland and uncertainty estimation WWTP
(%)
Countrywide N2O emissions were estimated by multiplying the total FIND-COM: Factor for industrial 1.25 1.25
and commercial protein
nitrogen load to the WWTP and different estimates of the EFs from
(default value)
WWTPs for Switzerland. We used four approaches for the estimation of (-)
EFs: a) the 2006 IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2006), b) the 2019 refinement of FNON–COM: Factor for nitrogen – 1.09
the IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2019), c) the average EF of all monitoring in non-consumed protein
disposed in sewer system
campaigns analysed in this study with a bottom-up approach for activity
(default value)
data estimation, based on extrapolation from data on 70% of the Swiss
(-)
wastewater load treated in WWTPs (Str¨ahl et al., 2013), and d) a method NHH: Additional nitrogen from – 1.08
developed in this study that used the same nitrogen loads as in c). household products added to
Emissions outside of the biological treatment of a WWTPs were not the wastewater (default value)
(-)
considered. All equations refer to the standard IPCC terminology.
Calculated total nitrogen load to 60,000 70,000
Approach a WWTP
The 2006 version of the IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2006), the current (t N/year)
standard method, was applied according to Eq. (2) of this study. The
values for the estimates were chosen according to the Swiss imple-
consumption (kg protein/year), TPLANT is the connection rate to WWTPs
mentation of the 2006 IPCC guidelines. The EF applied was 0.032%, as
(-), FNPR is the fraction of nitrogen in protein (-), NHH is the additional
suggested by the guidelines. A standard deviation could not be calcu-
nitrogen from household products added to the wastewater (-),
lated for the resulting countrywide emission, because the 2006 EF is
FNON–COM is the factor for nitrogen in non-consumed protein in the
based on a single monitoring campaign. Numerical values for other
sewer system (-), FIND-COM is the factor for industrial and commercial
variables are given in Table 3. protein (-), and EFPLANTS is the EF for N2O from WWTPs (kg N2O–N / kg
N 2O PLANTS=Protein⋅F NPR⋅T PLANTS⋅F IND(cid:0)COM⋅EF PLANTS (2) N).
where N2OPLANTS is the total, direct N2O emissions from WWTPs in Approaches c and d
Switzerland per year (kgN2O–N/year), Protein is Swiss protein con- For the bottom-up approach, we used the data set described in
sumption (kg protein/year), FNPR is the fraction of nitrogen in protein (Stra¨hl et al., 2013) to estimate the nitrogen load in the wastewater
(-), TPLANTS is the connection rate to WWTPs (-), FIND-COM is the factor for treated of all Swiss WWTPs. This dataset contains information on
industrial and commercial protein (-), and EFPLANTS is the EF for N2O influent loads, treatment type and treatment performance for WWTPs
from WWTPs (kg N2O–N / kg N). covering ~70% of the wastewater treated in CH in 2011 (Stra¨hl et al.,
2013). We assumed the same fractions of WWTP types and extrapolated
Approach b the nitrogen loads found in the dataset to the WWTPs treating the
The 2019 refinement of the 2006 IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2019) was remaining ~30% of the wastewater in Switzerland. An overview of the
applied according to Eq. (3) of this study. The values for the estimates data set is provided in section S6, SI. Countrywide emissions in ap-
were chosen from the Swiss implementation of the 2006 IPCC guide- proaches c and d were calculated according to Eq. (4). Approach (d) was
lines, and if not available, according to the default values in the 2019 calculated for two scenarios: d1 incorporates a high emission factor for
refinement. The EF applied was 1.6 ±0.5%, which was calculated as the the carbon removal category and d2 a low emission factor.
mean and the standard error of the monitoring campaigns used for the
N 2O PLANTS=EF PLANTS⋅N PLANTS (4)
guideline (Table S5, SI) (IPCC 2019). Numerical values of other vari-
ables are given in Table 3.
where N2OPLANTS is the total, direct N2O emissions from WWTPs in
N 2O PLANTS=Protein⋅F NPR⋅T PLANTS⋅N HH⋅F NON(cid:0)COM⋅F IND(cid:0)COM⋅EF PLANTS (3) Switzerland per year (kgN2O–N/year), EFPLANTS is the estimated
average EF of Switzerland (kg N2O–N / kg N) and NPLANTS is the total
where N2OPLANTS are the total, direct N2O emissions from WWTPs in nitrogen load treated in wastewater treatment plant (kgN/year).
Switzerland per year (kgN2O–N/year), Protein is Swiss protein The average EF was assessed by calculating the arithmetic mean of
all monitoring campaigns reported in this study (approach c) or a
Table 2 weighted sum of emission factors estimated separately for the three
Start date, end date, duration, and experimental lanes during experimental categories of WWTPs (carbon removal, nitrification only, and nitrogen
phases with one lane fully aerated at the Hofen WWTP. removal) in Switzerland (approaches d1 and d2) (Eq. (5)).
Start date End date Days Lane fully aerated ∑3
4.2.2020 14.4.2020 70 2–1 EF PLANTS= f i⋅EF i (5)
14.4.2020 27.4.2020 13 3–2 i=1
17.6.2020 24.6.2020 8 2–1
9.9.2020 23.9.2020 13 2–1 where EFPLANTS is the estimated average EF of Switzerland in scenarios
4

--- Page 5 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
(d1) and (d2) of approach (d) (kg N2O–N / kg N), fi is the fraction of value of 1.6% for all studies is comparable to the value proposed in the
nitrogen loading in Switzerland treated in WWTPs belonging to category updated IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2019). However, the high standard de-
i, and EFi is the estimated EF for category i. viation of the average EF (2% equivalent to 125% of the mean value)
shows clearly that using average EFs for countrywide extrapolations
Estimation of uncertainties leads to very high uncertainties, which is in line with previous research
We estimated the uncertainties (standard deviation) of the estimated (Valkova et al., 2020). Characterizing the N2O EF of a WWTP depending
average EFs (EFPLANTS) using linear error propagation. The standard from key indicators is therefore essential for the robust calculation of
error (SE) of the countrywide EF estimates for approaches (b), (c), (d1) countrywide EFs.
and (d2) were calculated by: None of the explanatory factors displayed in Fig. 2 exhibits a strong
√̅ ∑̅ i=̅ m̅̅ 1̅̅̅ f̅̅ i̅̅ (̅̅̅̅ √̅̅ σ̅̅ ni̅ ̅̅ i̅̅̅ )̅̅̅̅ 2̅ mre ela nt ti o san ew di it oh it sgh ne fiN 2 caO tE ecF lo. rW h aai tl e ln i wt (r io t=g he Nn 20r Oe .5m E1o v (a r=l =e 0ffi (cid:0).0c 06ie 0n 0c 2y d p3i s =p l ta 0ry 9s ta
SD EF= 2 ̅ ̅ (6) w e a k in d n s n i tc on tr ee l t i ao n r (cid:0) F, p ., F i g . ) , .e a -
z e o r r a l , 9 ,
Fig. 3). The low relevance of the reactor configuration and the treatment
where SDEF is the standard deviation of the estimated average EF, m is process can be only discussed qualitatively due to the low number of
the number of categories of WWTPs (b,c: 1, d1, d2: 3), ni is the number of monitoring campaigns for different processes: Firstly, flow through
samples in category i, fi is the fraction of nitrogen loading in Switzerland activated sludge systems exhibited a wide range of EFs (0.08%(cid:0) 8%; n =
treated in WWTPs belonging to category i, and σ i is the standard devi- 6). The systems monitored with our setup with an anoxic zone during
ation of the EFs in category i. The fraction √σ̅i̅̅ represents the standard the whole year (processes: AO and A2O, n =3) did not exceed an EF of
ni
deviation of EFi. 0.3%. The very low EFs are not in line with the value (1.9%) for the
Approach (a) is based on a single fixed EF, so uncertainty cannot be Viikinma¨ki WWTP, which uses with an AO process. This dissimilarity
quantified. may be explained by the difference between its influent conditions:
Viikinma¨ki is served by a separated sewer system and the climate in
Results and discussion Finland differs from that of central Europe (Kosonen et al., 2016).
Moreover, the nitrogen removal efficiency of the biological treatment is
N2O emission factors from long-term monitoring campaigns 60%: quite low compared to the other AO and A2O systems (Fig. 2).
Secondly, the EFs of two activated sludge plants with SBR configuration
The monitoring campaigns studied showed a yearly N2O EF ranging differed substantially (0.3% vs. 2.3%) as their nutrient removal goal
from 0.1% to 8% of the total influent nitrogen load (Fig. 2). The range of differed: nitrification vs. denitrification. Previously, SBR systems were
EF is significantly wider than has been reported from previous long-term reported to cause generally higher N2O emissions (Vasilaki et al., 2019),
monitoring campaigns (1.1 to 2.9%), mainly due to the high EF of the but our results indicate that low EFs can be reached in SBR systems too.
Giubiasco WWTP, whose treatment goal is carbon removal. The average Thirdly, the two A/I activated sludge systems varied substantially (0.2%
Fig. 2. N2O EF calculated for all available monitoring campaigns as a function of the yearly average nitrogen removal efficiency. Colors describe nutrient removal
goal. Small letters highlight campaigns assessed with a monitoring method other than the flux chamber method (a: (Daelman et al., 2015), b: (Kosonen et al., 2016),
c: (Chen et al., 2019)). Size of data points describes the size class of the WWTPs (1: 〈50,000 PE, 2: 50,000 – 200,000 PE, 3: 200,000 – 500,000 PE, 4: 〉500,000 PE).
Shape of data points indicates treatment process.
5

--- Page 6 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
Fig. 3. Correlation coefficients (spearman’s rank, r) and significance levels (p) of selected variables with N2O EFs. Abbreviations: C:N =ratio in the influent; N_in =
nitrogen inflow; r =correlation coefficient; Spec. =specific; SRT =sludge retention time.
vs 0.8%) even though they shared the same removal goal, denitrifica- Unlike the flux chamber approach, emissions from unaerated zones
tion. Finally, both biofilm systems monitored had a high EF (1.4%), in the biological treatment and secondary clarification can be assessed
which is closely in line with previously reported values (Bollon et al., using approaches i) and ii). However, the relative contribution of these
2016). The systems monitored by Daelman et al. (2015) at Kralingseveer emissions has been found to be of minor importance (Chen et al., 2019;
WWTP and Chen et al. (2019) at Avedøre WWTP have carrousel reactors Mikola et al., 2014). Three main sources of uncertainty arise when using
for the biological treatment and exhibited high EFs (1.1% and 2.9% the flux chamber method for monitoring N2O emissions from the aerated
respectively). zone in the biological treatment. Firstly, inhomogeneous air supply
The EFs assessed by other research groups are higher on average. within the biological treatment due to preferential flows of air and aging
This might be linked to the monitoring approach. In contrast to our flux of the membrane aerators can locally affect airflow rates and calculated
chamber based monitoring approach, the other monitoring campaigns emissions substantially. To reduce those uncertainties, we used a
were conducted using i) measurement of dissolved N2O in the biological multi-flux-chamber-approach with at least three flux chambers per lane
treatment combined with a stripping model and ii) the measurement of to cover the full range of off-gas concentrations within a treatment lane.
the collected off-gas of covered WWTP. The study by Chen et al. (2019) Secondly, inhomogeneity in nutrient and sewage loading of parallel
used approach i) and resulted in an EF similar to that found in this study. lanes in a WWTP may contribute to variation in the emissions between
The studies by Daelman et al. (2015) and Kosonen et al. (2016) used lanes, which remains unobserved if not all lanes are monitored (Gruber
approach ii) and reported very high EFs despite high nitrogen removal in et al. 2020). Thirdly, the quality of air flow and blower data differs
the biological treatment. highly between plants, ranging from blower frequency data of single
6

--- Page 7 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
blowers supplying several lanes to air flow meters installed in each zone conditions, which has been demonstrated in lab- and full-scale WWTP
of a treatment lane. To quantify the relevance of the uncertainties and studies (Conthe et al., 2018; Rodriguez-Caballero et al., 2015). However,
compare the off-gas monitoring approaches, a study comparing all a few WWTPs (Lucerne, Avedøre and, most strikingly, Kralingseveer)
monitoring approaches applied on one WWTP is needed. had a high EF factor (≥1%) despite high nitrogen removal efficiency,
most likely due to nitrite accumulation. Excluding the Kralingseveer
WWTP data from the correlation analysis results in a strong and sub-
Variables relevant for yearly N2O EF stantial relation between the EF and nitrogen removal efficiencies (r =
0.73, p =0.005).
Fig. 3 shows that the EF displays the highest and only statistically
(cid:0) Other variables that could potentially be linked to N2O did not show
significant correlation with the effluent NO2 load expressed as a frac-
significant correlation: nitrogen loading, specific reactor volume, C to N
tion of the incoming nitrogen load. Similarly, concentration peaks
ratio at inflow, aerobic SRT, and WWTP utilization (average/design
coin (cid:0)cided with N2O emissions peaks at WWTP with high EF, where
load). However, yearly average values are only partly useful for such
NO2 effluent conc (cid:0)entrations were measured (Giubiasco, Lucerne,
correlation analysis, because seasonal peak phases are not well-
Kralingseveer). NO2 accumulation has previously been linked to high
represented (Vasilaki et al., 2018). Nevertheless, we conclude from
N2O emissions in nitritation-denitrification systems (Kampschreur et al.,
the relations found that countrywide estimations can be improved by
2008a; Peng et al., 2015). A negative correlation with nitrogen removal
considering three factors governing the N2O EF of a WWTP: i) seasonal
efficiency was expected, because denitrifying communities have a high (cid:0)
emission pattern and NO2 accumulation, ii) all-year denitrification,
capacity to scavenge N2O produced during both anoxic and aerobic
Fig. 4. Monthly average N2O emission as a fraction of the monthly maximum emission for all monitoring campaigns analysed (a-c). The monitoring campaigns are
grouped by the presence and shape of a seasonal emission pattern (G1: peak month in Feb/March, G2: peak months Apr/May-Jun/Jul, G3: no clear emission peak
phase). EFs displayed above panels represent average EFs and standard deviation for each group. Boxplots (d) displaying the EFs in different groups (G1–3). First
quartiles, medians (red line), and third quartiles are displayed in the box. Triangles indicate mean values and circles represent outliers. Significance levels (Mann-
Whitney-Wilcoxon) indicates whether groups (G1 or G2) are significantly higher than pairing groups (G2 or G3) (not signficant (ns) >0.05, * <0.05, ** <0.01, ***
<0.001).
7

--- Page 8 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
and iii) unstable nitrification. These factors are discussed in the Hofen WWTP. Some WWTPs in Switzerland are operated for nitrogen
following sections. removal year-round whereas other treatment plants are fully aerated in
winter, and thus only perform denitrification in summer. The responses
(cid:0)
Seasonal emission pattern and NO2 accumulation of N2O emissions to switching aeration on or off in the first compartment
of the biological treatment train are shown in Fig. 5. The N2O emissions
A strong and reproducible emission pattern has been found in our were substantially increased on the fully aerated lanes (lanes 2–1 and
own N2O emission monitoring campaign and in all previous studies 3–2). Amongst the monitored lanes sharing the same secondary clarifier,
except for the Viikinma¨ki study (Fig. 4). Emissions typically peaked in the one with an anoxic zone (2–2) had lower emissions than the fully
March, April or May and dropped over several months to a minimum in aerated one (2–1) but still had higher emissions than the lane with
September or October. Hence, we analysed the seasonal emission anoxic zones on both lanes sharing the same secondary clarifier (lane
pattern of the long-term monitoring campaigns for all biological nutrient 3–2). When the conditions were swapped and lane 3–2 was fully aerated,
removal (BNR) activated sludge processes in temperate climates, since the emission pattern reacted immediately and switched completely. The
this category represents the majority (n =10) of the WWTPs monitored. anoxic zone, however, does not always have such a substantial impact
The analysis of seasonality is considered representative, because for on the emissions. During the first phase of the first experiment (begin-
some WWTPs more than 1 year of data were available (Uster, Lucerne, ning of February to mid-March), emissions on lanes 2–1 and 2–2 only
Altenrhein) and the observations represent independent measurements slightly increased. Additionally, the emissions rose to a lower level in
of comparable processes during different years. June and only marginally in September. The importance of denitrifica-
The seasonal emission pattern with a high emission peak in March or tion to reaching low emissions highlights the need to consider nitrogen
April was only apparent in five of the monitoring campaigns (Fig. 4, removal rates in countrywide estimations of N2O emissions.
group G1, panel a). Two WWTPs exhibited a shifted pattern with The varying impact of an anoxic zone underpin our conclusion that
extended peaks between April and July (group G2, panel b), and three the emission peaks in spring are caused by imbalanced nitrification and
(cid:0) (cid:0)
WWTPs featured a rather uniform pattern with only occasional peaks NO2 accumulation. An anoxic zone prevents NO2 and N2O accumu-
(group G3, panel c). The average EF was significantly higher for the lation probably via the return sludge, since both intermediates can be
WWTPs exhibiting the seasonal EF than those without (Mann-Whitney- reduced by denitrification as long as sufficient organic substrate is
Wilcoxon: U =3095, p =6 ×10(cid:0) 4; Fig. 4, panel d). Only one of the available (Pan et al., 2013). The seasonal dependence of denitrification
WWTPs with an emission peak in March or April had an EF clearly below on the emissions might be linked to the yearly variation of the microbial
1% (Moossee WWTP). WWTPs with a seasonal emission pattern emitted community and nitrifiers in a WWTP and relates to the previous dis-
mostly between February and May. The high contribution of the emis- cussion about yearly NOB variation (Griffin and Wells 2017; Gruber
sion peak phase to the total emissions highlights the strong need to et al., 2021; Ju et al., 2014). Experimental support for the relevance of
better understand the causes of the seasonal emission pattern (Chen seasonal nitrifier variation can be found in the monitoring campaign at
et al., 2019). Additionally, it signifies that emission reduction strategies the Giubiasco WWTP, which represents an extreme case of unstable
should be based and tested on long-term monitoring campaigns covering nitrification and highlights its impact on N2O emissions.
at least 1 year (Duan et al., 2020). The reproducibility of the emission
pattern on WWTPs with high EF (panel a, b) and between different lanes Unstable nitrification and N2O emission pattern
in a WWTP suggests that monitoring N2O emissions over 1 year is
sufficient. To characterize the risk of high N2O emissions in a process with
On several WWTPs (Lucerne, Uster, Kralingseveer), the pattern could unstable nitrification, we analysed the Giubiasco WWTP in more detail.
(cid:0)
be partly linked to NO2 accumulation in biological treatment during The Giubiasco WWTP is a CAS system with carbon removal as a treat-
(cid:0)
the spring season. We hypothesize that reduced NO2 oxidizing bacteria ment goal. The N2O emission pattern exhibited a strong seasonal vari-
(cid:0)
(NOB) performance could be the cause of seasonal NO2 accumulation ation (Fig. 6a). As a consequence of higher temperatures, nitrifiers can
(Gruber et al., 2021; Vieira et al., 2018) and lead to N2O peak emissions actually proliferate during the summer months and a seasonal occur-
induced by enhanced nitrifier denitrification or incomplete heterotro- rence of nitrification is the result at Giubiasco WWTP (Fig. 6b). The
phic denitrification. The emission pattern and the emission peaks in yearly emission pattern exhibits two emission peak phases (January –
spring help to prioritize efforts to mitigate N2O emissions, but the high March & June - July): these coincide with a dramatic change in nitrifi-
impact on the yearly EF is problematic for a countrywide extrapolation cation performance. Nitrification did not occur during winter, at low
based on only a few monitoring campaigns, since the frequency of temperatures. Therefore, the ammonium effluent concertation of the
(cid:0)
WWTPs with seasonal peaks is unknown. Additionally, NO2 effluent WWTP exhibits a pattern that is opposite of the wastewater temperature
(cid:0)
concentrations do not fully represent the NO2 concentrations in the curve. During the transition from a nitrifying to a non-nitrifying process,
(cid:0) (cid:0)
reactors, because NO2 can accumulate locally in a WWTP or even the NO2 concentrations in the WWTP effluent increased and massive
within sludge flocs (Chen et al., 2018). As a consequence, monitoring of amounts of N2O were emitted.
N2O emission patterns at WWTPs with plug-flow characteristics or The high EF (8%) for a non-BNR system contrasts strongly with
multiple biological treatment steps, such as the Kralingseveer WWTP, previous studies and the IPCC guidelines, which suggests that a high EF
may be less accurate if effluent concentrations are used or if concen- is linked to uncontrolled and incomplete nitrification. In most previous
trations are sampled only at one location. For such cases, extensive studies, non-BNR systems were found to have low emissions (Vasilaki
monitoring of nitrogen species at a range of locations may be advanta- et al., 2019). Our study demonstrates that long-term monitoring is
(cid:0)
geous. In order to avoid NO2 accumulation, all-year denitrification required to assess EFs from non-BNR systems, unless nitrification can be
appears to be an efficient strategy. WWTPs without seasonal emission excluded all year. Most of the previously reported monitoring campaigns
patterns (Birs, Zurich and Hofen) or with low EFs (Moossee) had a very were conducted over short periods, but a few discontinuous long-term
(cid:0)
low proportion of NO2 in the effluent of the biological treatment monitoring campaigns have been conducted for non-BNR system. A
(0.2–0.5% relative to the yearly nitrogen influent load). All of these study on a Brazil WWTP over 1 year resulted in a very low EF of 0.12%
WWTPs practise all-year denitrification. (Brotto et al., 2015). The nitrogen removal efficiency and nitrification
(cid:0)
exhibited a strong seasonal variation, but NO2 was comparatively low
Year-round denitrification and N2O reduction (0–0.8 mg NO2(cid:0) -N/L) in all effluent samples. A possible explanation for
the differences from the Giubiasco WWTP is the tropical climate, which
To test the seasonally varying influence of an anoxic zone and led to very high wastewater temperature (24 ◦C at minimum). High
denitrification on N2O emissions, full-scale tests were performed at the emissions for WWTPs with variable nitrogen removal efficiencies were
8

--- Page 9 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
Fig. 5. N2O emission at Hofen WWTP between January and October 2020. Arrows indicate the lanes where all three compartments were fully aerated.
+ (cid:0)
Fig. 6. Monthly average N2O emissions measured for both lanes at the Giubiasco WWTP (panel a) and wastewater temperature, monthly average NH4 -N, and NO2 -
N effluent concentrations (panel b). Error bars indicate standard deviation of daily averaged values.
reported from three monitoring campaigns using a discontinuous patterns were very similar to the WWTPs monitored in our study.
monitoring approach over a year (Yan et al., 2014). In that study, a Further continuous, long-term monitoring campaigns on carbon
WWTP with similarly low nitrogen removal efficiencies as the Giubiasco removal WWTPs are essential to provide better estimates of EF vari-
WWTP had a very high average EF of 3.6%. The yearly temperature ability. We expect negligible EFs from carbon removal systems that
9

--- Page 10 ---
W. Gruber et al. W a t e r R e s e a r c h X13(2021)100122
completely avoid BNR, partly explaining the low EF of previous studies. Table 4
For emission mitigation, limiting the SRT to prevent nitrifier growth Estimation of direct N2O emissions from wastewater treatment plants in
could be a feasible strategy for carbon removing plants. However, the Switzerland using five calculation methods.
strategy leads to impaired removal of organic compounds in the bio- Estimation Activity data EFPLANTS N2OPLANTS (Total
logical treatment (Falas et al., 2016) and, thus, to a trade-off decision approach (nitrogen load) (Estimated emissions and
between effluent quality and the carbon footprint of a WWTP. (tN/year) average EF) (%) uncertainties)
(tN2O–N/year)
a (2006 60,000 0.032 19
Countrywide extrapolation of N2O emissions and uncertainties guidelines)
b (2019 70,000 1.6 ±0.4 1120±280
The dependencies of the N2O EF discussed above and the corre- refinement)
sponding understanding of the mechanistic processes derived from the c (Swiss specific 47,000 1.6 ±0.5 744±230
activity data,
14 long-term monitoring campaigns on eight types of WWTP processes
average EF)
led us to propose a refined approach to estimating on-site N2O emissions d1 (Swiss specific 47,000 3.6 ±0.2 1690±90
of WWTPs in Switzerland. We suggest calculating an EF for the three activity data,
nutrient removal categories of carbon removal, nitrification only, and weighted EF,
Carbon
year-round nitrogen removal with the overall assumption that a lower
removal: high
nitrogen removal results in higher emissions and a higher probability of EF)
(cid:0)
NO2 accumulation unless nitrification can be excluded completely. We
calculated an average EF for Switzerland by multiplying the average EF d2 (Swiss specific 47,000 0.9 ±0.2 410±90
for each category (Fig. 7a) with the share of nitrogen load treated by activity data,
weighted EF,
each category (Fig. 7b), (Table 4). The total emissions were calculated
Carbon
for two scenarios with our approach (d1 and d2), because data avail- removal: low
ability for carbon removal plant was not sufficient and emissions were EF)
expected to differ substantially between such WWTPs. We did not pro-
pose a linear regression model for EF extrapolation, since data on
effluent NO2(cid:0) , the best predictor for EFs (Fig. 3), was limited on a e os ti tm hea t Wio Wns d Po an fo tet ri n dc il su cd he rN g2 eO oe m this es i eo nn vs io rori ng min ea nt ti n ag f dr o tm t h toe e af lfl Gu Hen Gt
f T a t n he t
countrywide level in Switzerland, and is in most other countries.
emission in Switzerland in 2011 were around 10% higher than in 2018.
The results of the new methods (approaches d1 and d2) are
Accordingly, we expect an increasing importance of N2O emissions from
compared with the current IPCC approaches (approaches a and b) and
WWTPs to the total Swiss GHG emissions, especially assuming the pro-
an average EF of all 14 EFs (approach c) discussed in this study (Table 4).
jected, continued decline of total GHG emissions.
The estimated total nitrogen load to WWTP based on our bottom-up
The discrepancies between the activity data from the IPCC ap-
approach (c, d) is lower than that calculated with the IPCC ap-
proaches and our data confirm that a country-specific bottom-up
proaches (a, b). Nevertheless, the emission estimates calculated with the
approach should be prioritized for estimation if sufficient data is avail-
2006 guidelines are drastically lower than the other estimates due to the
able (Ramirez-Melgarejo et al., 2020). The low emission estimates
very low EF applied (Table 4). N2O emissions calculated with our ap-
yielded from the 2006 guidelines highlight that an update of the esti-
proaches (c, d1, d2) vary substantially and depend primarily on the
mation methods was clearly required for more accurate representation
estimated EF for carbon removal plants (Fig. 7c). The 2019 refinements
of wastewater treatment in GHG inventories. However, our results show
are in the range of the total emissions estimated with our approaches
that the 2019 refinement is not optimal for calculating country specific
and data. In summary, all the estimates show that direct N2O emissions
EFs for two reasons: (i) The selection of monitoring campaigns in the
from WWTPs are important and sum up to 0.3–1.4% of total Swiss GHG
guidelines used to calculate the average EF is arbitrary and not
emissions (~50 MtCO2,eq/year in 2011) (FOEN 2020). Notably, these
Fig. 7. Estimation of the countrywide EF for Switzerland (CH). N =plants with an anoxic zone for year-round denitrification; NH4 =nitrifying plants denitrifying
only during the warm season; C =plants not required to nitrify. C (d1) and (d2) denote EFs for the two scenarios tested. Error bars indicate the standard errors. (a)
Estimated EFs per nutrient removal category. (b) Treated nitrogen load per nutrient removal categories in CH in 2011. (c) Estimate emissions for each category
assuming activity data in Table 4.
10