--- Page 1 ---
Int. J. Global Warming, Vol. 21, No. 1, 2020 1
Environmental performances of the wastewater
treatment plants: Green Index
Pelin Yapıcıoğlu and Özlem Demir*
Environmental Engineering Department,
Engineering Faculty,
Harran University,
Şanlıurfa, Turkey
Email: pyapicioglu@harran.edu.tr
Email: odemir@harran.edu.tr
*Corresponding author
Abstract: The Green Index as a new indicator to determine the environmental
performance has been developed in order to reduce the unfavourable
environmental impacts of the wastewater treatment plants. The main aim of this
study is to reveal the environmental performances of the wastewater treatment
plants. An industrial and a municipal wastewater treatment plant in Turkey
have been compared in terms of the Green Index. The results revealed that in
August, for the municipal and the industrial wastewater treatment plants, CO2
emission values were 0.972 and 0.42 kg/h, respectively. N2O emissions were
also 8.7 and 1.53 kg/h, respectively. CO2 emissions in September were with the
values of 0.507 and 0.657 kg/h for the municipal and the industrial wastewater
treatment plants, respectively and N2O emissions were 5.4 and 1.2 kg/h,
respectively. The Green Index of industrial wastewater treatment plant was
lower than the municipal one with the values of 1.13 and 1.36, respectively.
Keywords: Green Index; wastewater treatment; environmental performance;
greenhouse gases; GHGs; global warming.
Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Yapıcıoğlu, P. and
Demir, Ö. (2020) ‘Environmental performances of the wastewater treatment
plants: Green Index’, Int. J. Global Warming, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp.1–19.
Biographical notes: Pelin Yapıcıoğlu is a research and teaching assistant at
Harran University at the Department of Environmental Engineering. She assists
in the lectures on wastewater treatment and water treatment. She received her
BSc in Environmental Engineering from Dokuz Eylül University. She received
her MSc in Environmental Engineering from Harran University. She studied
greenhouse gas emission minimisation for her thesis. She is still a PhD student
at the Environmental Engineering Department at Harran University. Her
research interests are wastewater treatment, greenhouse gas emission
modelling, and climate change.
Özlem Demir is an Associate Professor at the Department of Environmental
Engineering at Harran University in Turkey. She received her Bachelor’s in
Science and Master’s in Science in Environmental Engineering from Harran
University in 2002 and 2005, respectively. She received her PhD in
Environmental Engineering from Dokuz Eylül University in 2012. She became
an Assistant Professor in 2012 at the Department of Environmental Engineering
at Harran University. She received the title of Associate Professor in the field
Copyright © 2020 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd.

--- Page 2 ---
2 P. Yapıcıoğlu and Ö. Demir
of Environmental Engineering in 2018. Her research interests include sludge
treatment and disposal, sludge minimisation techniques, wastewater treatment,
mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions at wastewater treatment plants, and
climate change.
This paper is a revised and expanded version of a paper entitled ‘A case study
of green index assessment for an industrial and a municipal wastewater
treatment plant in turkey’ presented at 7th Global Conference on Global
Warming (GCGW-2018), Izmir, Turkey, 24–28 June 2018.
1 Introduction
Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) have been widely used to decrease the water
contamination generated by urban and industrial processes in order to reduce the
unfavourable impacts on the flora and fauna, aquatic life and public health (Wang et al.
2012; Zang et al., 2015). The WWTPs have an important role in the of wastewater
treatment however they emit greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Koutsou et al., 2018) and
promote the global warming. WWTPs consume the natural resources and emit
GHGs such as CO and N O due to the wastewater treatment processes, sludge
2 2
treatment, chemical usage, energy consumption, maintenance and transport activities
(Rodriguez-Garcia et al. 2012; Flores-Alsina et al., 2011; Kyung et al., 2015; Metcalf &
Eddy, 2014). The amount of GHG emissions from municipal WWTP has become
increasingly important due to their impact on global warming (Nguyen et al., 2019).
GHG generated from the waste and wastewater are corresponded to 2.8% of total GHG
(IPCC, 2007b). CO emissions emitted due to the treatment processes and energy
2
consumption in WWTPs (Molinos-Senante and Hernández-Sanchom 2014; IPCC, 2007a;
Yapıcıoğlu and Demir, 2016) are not only the unique GHG in the WWTPs but also N O
2
is the other major GHG produced as a result of nutrient removal from wastewater
(nitrification and denitrification) and sewage sludge stabilisation process (Tchobanoglous
et al., 2003; Mampaey et al., 2013; Ni et al. 2011; Rodriguez-Caballero et al., 2014).
The emission from treatment processes and the emission in the discharge point and
receiver water body are classified as the direct emission while sourced by the electricity
consumption and air consumption are referred as the indirect emission (Parravicini et al.,
2016). Every WWTP differs about emitting direct GHG emissions, according to the
existing treatment processes and the influent wastewater characterisations. GHGs such as
CH , CO and N O emitted from WWTPs are classified as the direct and the indirect
4 2 2
GHG emissions (Polruang et al., 2018). The direct GHG emissions are caused by
biological processes. CO is emitted from microbial respiration. While N O is exposed in
2 2
the nitrification and denitrification stages, CH occurs in the anaerobic digestion period
4
(Zhang et al., 2017). The electricity consumption and biological treatment are the major
GHG emissions sources while the indirect emissions are from chemical usage and
transports (Chai et al., 2015).
Due to the GHG emissions, WWTPs can be considered as one of the resource of
contributors of the global warming. Some technical and biological methods were
developed for the prevention of the global warming from WWTPs (Yapıcıoğlu and
Demir, 2017b). In this context, to decrease the unfavourable environmental impacts of

--- Page 3 ---
Environmental performances of the wastewater treatment plants 3
WWTPs, a new indicator to determine the environmental performance has been
developed named as the Green Index (GI) (Mustapha et al., 2018; Meneses et al., 2015).
The GI assessment is a scientific and integrated model to gather and analyse data and
resources that cause to the unfavourable environmental impacts and lower environmental
performance (Mustapha et al., 2016). The GI can be calculated by means of a simple
equation tool. This calculation term developed by University Technology Malaysia
includes electricity consumption (EC), carbon dioxide emission (ECO ), nitrous oxide
2
emissions (EN O) and air consumption (AC) and effluent quality parameters which are
2
biological oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD) and nitrate
concentration (NC). In this study, GHGs emissions and effluent quality are considered as
the components of the GI as the integrated model.
This paper aims that to analyse various control mechanism and their combination
route in order to promote the improvement of the global performance of the WWTP and
to evaluate the results by the GI. In this study, for an industrial and a municipal WWTP
in Turkey, the GI assessment has been applied and compared. The main aim of this study
is to reveal the impacts of GHG emissions and effluent quality on the environmental
performances of the WWTPs. The impact of nitrogen removal in the WWTPs to the GI
has been evaluated in terms of GHG emissions. First of all, GHG emission monitoring
has been performed for both plants to determine the environmental performances. CO
2
and N O emissions have been monitored for two months, August and September. The
2
indirect emissions values that are originated from air consumption and electricity
consumption have been provided for these months. Finally, the GI corresponds to two
different WWTPs has been figured out with a simple equation. GHG emissions are one of
the indicators in order to determine the environmental performances of the WWTPs. In
this study, the closed chamber (CC) method and GHG emission measurement have been
applied for both a municipal and an industrial WWTP to determine the GI considering the
direct and indirect emissions and effluent quality and organic materials removal
efficiency. The originality of this work is that CC method was used to determine the
direct emissions as the component of the GI tool for two different WWTPs. Apart from
the studies in the literature, the environmental performances of A2O process and the
combination of chemical treatment and activated sludge processes were benchmarked
with the help of the GI by applying CC emission measurement method.
1.1 GHG emissions and environmental performances of WWTPs
WWTPs have been considered as one of the GHG generator plants (IPCC, 2007a;
Yapıcıoğlu, 2018) and have an important role in the world in GHG production (IPCC,
2014; Yapıcıoğlu, 2018). CO , CH and N O are the major GHGs of the WWTPs
2 4 2
(Masuda et al., 2015; Mannina et al., 2016; Corominas et al., 2012; Yapıcıoğlu and
Demir, 2017a). The main resources of GHG emissions in a WWTPs are the type of the
existing treatment process (biological, chemical or biochemical processes, aerobic or
anaerobic processes etc.), energy consumption (air consumption in the aeration process,
electricity consumption, fuel consumption, etc.), chemical usage (added chemical
substances for sludge conditioning, for nitrification and denitrification, for alkalinity and
pH adjustment etc.), sludge stabilisation and dewatering processes (incineration,
anaerobic digestion, composting etc.) and the plant maintenance (Kyung et al., 2015;
Metcalf & Eddy 2014; Yapıcıoğlu and Demir, 2017b). GHG emissions can be classified
as the direct emissions and the indirect emissions (Parravicini et al., 2016; Yapıcıoğlu,

--- Page 4 ---
4 P. Yapıcıoğlu and Ö. Demir
2018). The direct GHG emissions for WWTPs are generated both in the sewage
collection system and generated by the treatment processes used in the WWTPs and the
emissions generated by the receiving water body for the effluent. The source of indirect
GHG emissions are electricity consumption, air consumption, transportation (for
chemical substances and sludge transfer), chemical use and disposal and reuse processes.
The total GHG emission is the result of the sum of these two emission types (Parravicini
et al., 2016). The processes related to the wastewater treatment deplete natural resources
and emit GHG emissions that have a potential harmful effect to the environment
(Mustapha et al., 2018). WWTPs have been contributed to the global warming due to the
GHG emissions and a monitoring system should be developed to decrease their negative
effects to the atmosphere (Mustapha et al., 2018; Meneses et al., 2015).
Therefore, a methodology to determine the environmental performances of WWTPs
is required for the GHG emission measurement. The performance evaluation is very
crucial to determine the environmental impacts. Recently, several commonly used
performance evaluation tools have been improved for WWTPs such as the life cycle
assessment (LCA), life cycle impact assessment (LCIA), environmental impact
assessment (EIA) and water footprint assessment (WFA) (Mustapha et al., 2018;
Teodosiu et al., 2016). Moreover, environmental performance indicators (EPIs) and
multi-criteria analysis (MCA) are the other mainly used tools for the EIA
(Molinos-Senante and Hernández-Sancho, 2014; Su et al., 2019). There are some studies
are related to this topic in the literature. Nopens et al. (2010) determined The effluent
quality index (EQI) by the concentration of the contaminants from the treatment plant
and they also determined The operational cost index (OCI) by the economic cost
associated with the plant (Nopens et al., 2010). Emmerson et al. (1995) conducted a study
applying LCA and observed that CO emissions had been closely related to energy
2
consumption. Kim et al. (2015) investigated the environmental performance of an
advanced biological WWTP using EPIs. EQI, OCI, and Greenhouse Gas Index (GGI) are
the EPIs to evaluate and optimise the performance of the treatment system. According to
the study, the optimised system simultaneously decreased the GHG emissions by 31%,
reduced the operating cost by 11%, and improved the effluent quality by 2%.
Molinos-Senante and Hernández-Sancho (2014) used the pure (PEPI) and mixed (MEPI)
EPIs to evaluate the performance of 60 Spanish WWTPs. The direct and the indirect
GHG emissions were regarded as the undesirable outputs. They found that PEPI was
equal to or higher than MEPI and the minimisation of potent GHG emissions were nearly
30% of the emissions released. Gémar et al. (2018) proposed the dynamic weighted
Russell directional distance model (WRDDM) to obtain an eco-productivity change index
for each major component of the WRDDM model. The reduction in eco-productivity was
attributed to the operating costs and GHG emissions according to their results. There are
some differences among the environmental performance assessment techniques in terms
of methodology, many researchers used aforementioned performance evaluations to
benchmark and choose the best WWTP design to give the least damage to the
environment (Mustapha et al., 2018). Piao et al. (2016) implemented performance
evaluation for a WWTP using life cycle analysis (LCA). Morera et al. (2016) used water
footprint (WF) methodology to determine the environmental performance of a WWTP.
Baresel et al. (2015) applied environment impact assessment (EIA) method to reveal the
environmental performance of a wastewater reclamation plant.
In this study, the GI tool was used as the methodology to determine the
environmental performances of two different WWTPs. The reason of selecting this tool

--- Page 5 ---
Environmental performances of the wastewater treatment plants 5
as the performance assessment methodology is that the GI developed by Mustapha et al.
(2016) is an integrated EPI is an innovative performance assessment tool that contains
especially the direct and indirect GHG emission measurement and effluent quality.
The GI used factor analysis can develop the power and water consumption, waste
production. The facility authorities estimate the performance of the plants with the GI
(Mustapha et al., 2016). The GI equation derived from the capitalisation-weighted index
equation is given by:
GreenIndex=ItW I W (1)
o o o
Variables in equation (1) are represented in terms of the base year green elements (Io),
base year weighting (W ) and given period green elements (It). The base year weighting
o
(W ) is calculated using the base year data (Mustapha et al., 2016). The GI can be applied
o
as an approach to monitoring resources that support cleaner production to compare the
performance of WWTPs It can also assess the environmental performance of the process
and help to select a process that has minimum effect on the environment (Mustapha et al.,
2018). Mustapha et al. (2018) used the GI methodology to determine the environmental
performance of a municipal WWTP with the help of SuperPro Designer program.
2 Material and methods
2.1 Description of the study areas
In this study, the GI has been determined for a full-scale industrial plant and a full-scale
municipal WWTP locates in Şanlıurfa in Turkey, comparatively. Figures 1 and 2 present
the existing wastewater treatment process flow schemes of the both WWTPs.
Figure 1 Municipal WWTP process flow scheme (see online version for colours)

--- Page 6 ---
6 P. Yapıcıoğlu and Ö. Demir
In the Municipal WWTP, nutrient removal has been performed and physical treatment
and A2O Process have been applied. In the industrial WWTP, chemical treatment and
activated sludge process have been applied and only carbonaceous material removal has
been achieved. Influent wastewater characterisation for both plants has been presented in
Table 1.
Figure 2 Industrial WWTP process flow scheme (see online version for colours)
Table 1 Influent wastewater characterisations for the WWTPs
Parameter Municipal WWTP Industrial WWTP
Flow Rate (m3/d) 17.000 4.000
pH 7.5 7.76
BOD5 (mg/L) 302 823
COD (mg/L) 603 1720.2
TSS (mg/L) 333 820
TKN (mg/L) 68 27.5
TP (mg/L) 13.6 9.8
FOG (mg/L) 41 127
2.2 Description of the case study
The GI has been used and compared for a full-scale industrial plant and full-scale
municipal WWTP in Şanlıurfa in Turkey, in this study. In the municipal WWTP, the
nitrogen removal from wastewater is achieved by A2O (Anaerobic-Anoxic-Oxic) but in
the industrial WWTP, activated sludge process and chemical treatment are not
responsible for nitrogen removal. The GI is figured out by means of a derived equation
tool developed by University Technology Malaysia. In this study, the effects of GHG

--- Page 7 ---
Environmental performances of the wastewater treatment plants 7
emissions and effluent quality on the environmental performances of the WWTPs have
been investigated. The direct emissions are CO and N O emissions and, the emissions
2 2
from electricity consumption and air consumption are considered as the indirect
emissions. Electricity consumption and air consumption that related to August and
September have been provided from the plants operators monthly. CO and N O
2 2
emissions were monitored with the CC method in both plants. COD, BOD and NO -
3
concentrations were ensured from the wastewater analyses.
2.3 The GI calculation term
The GI as the EPI could be calculated with a simple equation model. The calculation term
developed by University Technology Malaysia contains electricity consumption (EC),
carbon dioxide emission (ECO ), nitrous oxide emissions (EN O), air consumption (AC)
2 2
and effluent quality parameters which are BOD, COD and NC. This calculation model
can be used to reveal the environmental performance of the WWTPs. The basic equation
model is shown in equation (2).
−0.165CWt  −0.165CWo 
   
+0.928ECt +0.928ECo
   
+0.925ECO t  +0.925ECO 
 2   2 
TheGreenIndex(GI)=+0.921ACt +0.921ACo
 
(2)
+0.921EN Ot  +0.921EN Ot 
 2   2 
+−0.686NCt  +−0.686NCo 
+−0.667BODt +−0.667BODo
   
 +−0.667CODt  +−0.667CODo
 
where
CW Water consumption (kg/h)
EC Electricity consumption (kWh/h)
ECO CO emission (kg/h)
2 2
AC Air consumption (kg/h)
EN O N O emission (kg/h)
2 2
NC Effluent nitrate concentration (mg/L)
BOD Effluent biochemical oxygen demand concentration (mg/L)
COD Effluent chemical oxygen demand concentration (mg/L).
In the equation, carbon dioxide emission (ECO ), electricity consumption (EC), nitrous
2
oxide emission (EN O), air consumption (AC), BOD, COD and NC are considered; the
2
other variable are negligible and can be regarded that its values are ‘0’ because in this
study, only the direct and indirect emissions and effluent quality parameters have been
considered. CO and N O emissions are the direct emissions and the emissions due to the
2 2
air and electricity consumption are the indirect emissions, in terms of the component of
the GI. BOD, COD and NC are regarded as the effluent quality parameters.

--- Page 8 ---
8 P. Yapıcıoğlu and Ö. Demir
So the derived equation is represented as the equation (3).
0.928ECt  0.928ECo 
   
+0.925ECO t +0.925ECO o
 2   2 
0.921ACt  +0.921ACo 
   
TheGreenIndex( GI)= +0.921EN 2Ot  +0.921EN 2Oo  (3)
+−0.686NCT  +−0.686NCo 
   
+−0.667BODt +−0.667BODo
 +−0.667CODt  +−0.667CODo
 
In this study, two variable components have been used that are related to August (means
until the starting time as ‘o’ time) and September (the means to the ‘t’ time).
2.4 CO and N O emissions measurement
2 2
CO and N O are the main GHGs for the WWTPs (Yapıcıoğlu and Demir, 2017b). CO
2 2 2
and N O as the indirect emissions are emitted from the treatment processes and were
2
measured with CC method by using emission isolation flux chamber and Drager X–Am
5000 model portative multi-gas analyser. According to the CC method, the gas is retained
in the emission isolation flux chamber for quite a while. The optimum gas retention time
is 30 minutes because it was observed that the gas amounts were fixed after 30 minutes.
The gas flow rate can be considered as the volume of the flux chamber. The total gas
flow rate is approximately 30 kg/h (It is figured out from the volume of the flux chamber
and the retention time). The retention time is 0.5 h. CO emission calculation was figured
2
out by monitoring gas percentage portion (%) and NO emission was detected with the
2
help of its gas concentration (ppm). It was assumed that all NO transformed to N O
2 2
(IPCC, 2007a, 2007b). For both plants, in August and in September, CO and N O
2 2
measurements have been performed. Figures 3 to 4 show the direct CO and N O
2 2
emission monitoring points.
The GHG emission values used in determining GI that are the sum of the emissions
measured from all the monitoring treatment units for CO and N O emissions. GHG
2 2
emission measurement points in the municipal plant are grit chamber, primary settling
tanks, aeration tank (oxic chamber) and secondary settling tanks. The GHG emission
monitoring points of the industrial WWTP are aerated grit chamber, the chemical
treatment unit (coagulation and flocculation tank), primary settling tank, aeration tanks
and secondary settling tank.
2.4.1 CC method
There are some emission measurement methods for the WWTPs such as the open
chamber (OC) method, CC method and implementing a gas vacuuming method etc.
(Masuda et al., 2015). In this study, CO and N O emissions were measured with CC
2 2
method using emission isolation flux chamber that has 31 cm diameter and 31 cm height
and is in the semi-spherical form and Drager X–Am 5000 Model portative multi-gas
analyser. The CC Method can be only applied for the open treatment units. According to
the CC method, the gas is retained in the emission isolation flux chamber for 30 minutes.
So the gas flow rate can be considered as the volume of the flux chamber. The gas is

--- Page 9 ---
Environmental performances of the wastewater treatment plants 9
vacuumed with a pump and the gas percentages of CO and the concentration of N O in
2 2
the total gas volume can be read on the Drager X –Am 5000 multi-gas analyser. Masuda
et al. (2015) studied similarly; they used CC methodology to determine CH and N O
4 2
emissions for a municipal WWTP for the equalisation tank, primary and secondary
sedimentation tanks.
Figure 3 Municipal WWTP emission monitoring points (see online version for colours)
Figure 4 Industrial WWTP emission monitoring points (see online version for colours)

--- Page 10 ---
10 P. Yapıcıoğlu and Ö. Demir
2.5 Air and electricity consumption monitoring
The indirect emissions are regarded as resulting from the air consumption and electricity
consumption. Air consumption has been obtained from the blowers indicators monthly
and electricity consumption has been observed from the electricity bills. All treatment
units have been considered, at this stage.
2.6 Effluent quality determination
The values of COD, BOD and NO - concentrations were ensured from wastewater
3
analyses. Wastewater analyses were performed using standard methods.
3 Results and discussion
The GI comparative evaluation has been implemented and for a municipal WWTP that
A2O process is available and an industrial WWTP that chemical treatment and activated
sludge system is applied by means of GHG measurement. Table 2 presents the results of
the GI assessment using equation (2).
The assessment results revealed that the GI of industrial WWTP that chemical
treatment and activated sludge process are applied is lower than the municipal WWTP
that A2O Process is implemented and their values are 1.13 and 1.36, respectively. If
nitrogen removal is ensured, the GI is higher for WWTPs. The environmental
performance of municipal plant is lower because of the nitrous oxide emissions. Organic
substances removal efficiency is very important for the environmental performances of
the WWTPs considering effluent quality. COD and BOD removal efficiency is
approximately 97% for the industrial plant. The organic materials removal efficiency of
the municipal WWTP is nearly 94%. It can be said that higher organic materials removal
efficiency refers to higher environmental performances for the WWTPs.
Mustapha et al. (2018) investigated the GI of a municipal WWTP, similarly. A
Ludzack-Ettinger process has a higher GI value due to higher nitrogen emission,
similarly with this study. They compared the Ludzack-Ettinger process and Bardenpho
process using the GI assessment by means of the SuperPro Designer program. In that
study, A2O process and chemical treatment and activated sludge process has been
benchmarked. According to their study, the GI of Ludzack-Ettinger process was higher
than Bardenpho process; the values were 0.7592 and 0.5764, respectively. The highest GI
corresponds to the Ludzack-Ettinger process was 1.0004. In this study, both A2O
processes (The GI = 1.36) and chemical treatment combined activated sludge process
(The GI = 1.13) were higher than this value. So, it can be said that A2O process has the
unfavourable impacts more than Ludzack-Ettinger process and Bardenpho Process
among nutrient removal processes. If nutrient removal has been obtained, the GI is higher
due to the nitrous oxide emissions.