--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-025-06338-z
ORIGINAL PAPER
Analysis of greenhouse gas production at the El Prat del Llobregat
wastewater treatment plant, Spain: the decarbonization challenge
M. A. Urrea Vivas1 · L. Seguí‑Amórtegui2 · H. Guerrero‑García‑Rojas3
Received: 24 October 2024 / Revised: 25 November 2024 / Accepted: 31 December 2024 / Published online: 9 January 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
The process of decarbonization of Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTPs) has become a global priority. WWTP consume
large amounts of energy and emit Greenhouse Gases (GHG) to remove pollutants. Therefore, this article quantitatively
analyzes the greenhouse gas emissions produced during the wastewater treatment of one of the largest and most modern
wastewater treatment plants in Europe, the El Prat del Llobregat Wastewater Plant. The assessment focused on evaluating the
mass and energy balance of the entire process. Identifying the organic load present was essential for determining the impact
on the generation of (GHG) during the wastewater treatment and regeneration process. According to the characteristics of the
system, the inventory of total emissions is established, identifying the direct emissions produced by each of the stages (carbon
dioxide and methane emissions) and the indirect emissions produced by the use of electricity and chemicals, respectively.
The results revealed that the highest direct greenhouse gas emission was observed in the biological reactor with the value
of 2.5 k gCO eq/kg COD, 0.08 kg N O/kgN and 0.0062 k gCH /kgCOD. The annual GHG emissions from CH , N O
2 2 removed 4 4 2
and C O emissions from the water and sludge line are equivalent to 3432 tCO eq, apart from the emission caused by flaring
2 2
biogas, which represents 578.39 t CO eq. The largest contribution comes from indirect emissions, where energy consumption
2
generates 3,459,105 tCO /eq. The largest energy consumer in the entire WWTP were the biological reactor with secondary
2
settling and the tertiary treatment, which accounts for 45.20% and 14.8% of the total energy needs respectively.
Keywords Wastewater treatment plant · Greenhouse gas emissions · Mass balance · Energy balance · Carbon emissions
accounting · CO emission reduction and decarbonization
2
Introduction
discharge of pollutants to the environment, in addition to
protecting water sources, ecosystems and public health,
Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTP) have become a fun- while also recovering used water into a new source of
damental pillar for the strategic development of a society materials (Li et al. 2021). Today, the aspiration to achieve
in constant growth. The main objective of WWTP is to a green future with zero emissions is critical to mitigating
be able to simulate the natural cycle (Jodar-Abellan et al. climate change. WWTPs are one of the sectors with high
2019), purifying and regenerating wastewater to reduce the energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
(Delre et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2016), it is estimated that they
consume 3% of global energy (Dickin et al. 2020). WWTP
Editorial responsibility: S. Mirkia. have begun to develop strategies that have more sustain-
able approaches, with the aim of achieving decarbonization
*
M. A. Urrea Vivas
through the "water-energy" nexus. The increase in popula-
michelle.atala.urrea@upc.edu
tion density in large cities and the trend towards urbaniza-
1 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, tion requires higher levels of treatment, due to the standards
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Carrer de Jordi imposed for the discharge of wastewater (Mo and Zhang
Girona, 1, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
2012), leading to an increase in treatment capacities and
2 Faculty of Business and Communication, Universidad therefore energy consumption.
Internacional de la Rioja (UNIR), Logroño, La Rioja, Spain
The energy consumption and the type and amount of
3 Department of Economics, Universidad Michoacana de San GHG production in WWTPs are varied due to different
Nicolás de Hidalgo (UMSNH), Morelia, Michoacán, Mexico
Vol.:(0123456789)

--- Page 2 ---
1 0416 International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432
circumstances, such as its size, technologies, purification plants’ energy consumption account for 40% of total
and regeneration processes, the load of pollutants in the emissions: C O emissions from wastewater treatment
2
wastewater to be treated and the regulations stipulated in plants due to energy consumption are 0.391 kgCO /
2
each country to obtain an effluent outlet with specific water kWh, and 0.08 kg CO /kg COD from aerobic wastewater
2
qualities (Longo et al. 2016). treatment processes (Campos et al. 2016; Lin 2020).
Most plants worldwide have an established 4-stage The process of decarbonizing the WWTPs is mainly
treatment for the water line and sludge process. In the water performed in order to comply with legislation to reduce
line, the pretreatment has an energy demand ranging from the environmental impact, but it is extremely important
2 to 8% of the energy consumption (Longo et al. 2016), in terms of economic viability, since the operating costs
which would represent 0.009–0.018 kWh/m3 treated. attributed to energy consumption are between 30 and
The primary treatment has an energy demand of 2–3% 40% of the total cost of operations and maintenance of the
(Nakkasunchi et al. 2021), so it is generally considered to water line. In terms of treatment and disposal of the sludge
be the process that consumes the least energy. For example, produced, this often accounts for up to 50–60% of the total
Canada has an electricity consumption in its pretreatment operating costs of the plants (Gude 2015; Panepinto et al.
and primary treatment of 0.002–0.1 kWh/m3, Hungary 2016; Wei et al. 2003) and is expected to grow due to the
has 0.04–0.19 kWh/m3 and Australia 0.1–0.37 kWh/ observed increase in the costs of sludge disposal (Ginestet
m3 (Kneppers et al. 2009; Pitas et al. 2010). Secondary 2006). Therefore, if energy consumption is reduced, it
treatment is characterized by its high energy consumption would reduce not only greenhouse gas emissions but also
in the aeration process, with demand ranging from 50 to operating costs and the management and reuse of sludge.
74% (Longo et al. 2016; Mamais et al. 2015), represented by The estimation and quantification of GHG emissions
0.15–0.77 kWh/m3 at a general level. Australia, for example, in WWTPs has become a major problem that urgently
requires 0.46 kWh/m3 and the United States 0.33–0.60 kWh/ needs to be solved, mainly because wastewater and
m3 (Gu et al. 2017a, b). Tertiary treatment can have a greater sludge management is responsible for 257 million tonnes
fluctuation in energy demand due to the processes applied of carbon dioxide equivalent globally, of which almost
for the removal of nutrients and pathogens, therefore it half are energy-related emissions (Lutkin et al. 2022). In
accounts for between 8 and 13% of electricity consumption addition, 267 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent
(Longo et al. 2016). Analysis of the energy consumption come from on-site remediation, nitrous oxide is also
of different WWTPs showed that these processes require estimated to be responsible for 32% of global emissions from
between 0.39 and 3.74 kWh/m3 in Japan, while in New wastewater treatment (Lutkin et al. 2022). The degradation
Zealand, Taiwan, Hungary and the United States it ranges of organic matter during wastewater treatment contributes
between 0.41 and 0.75 kWh/m3 (Bodík and Kubaská, 2013; approximately 1.57% of global GHG emissions and 3.49–5%
Pitas et al. 2010; Plappally and Lienhard 2012). As for the of global non-carbon dioxide GHG emissions (Chen et al.
treatment of the sludge obtained during the different stages 2020; Dickin et al. 2020).
in the wastewater line, energy consumption ranges between The total set of GHG emissions of sewage treatment
15 and 25% (Mamais et al. 2015). The energy consumption plants are divided into two parts (Parravicini et al. 2016):
of sludge treatment depends on whether or not the sludge one is the direct emission of greenhouse gases such as C O ,
2
is incinerated, if using a CAS (Conventional activated C H and N O in the process of sewage treatment; the other
4 2
sludge) method with incineration for sludge treatment it is is the indirect emission caused by the energy and materials
0.38–1.49 kWh/m3, but if the CAS method is implemented consumed in operation, indirect GHG emissions are
without incineration, it is 0.39–3.74 kWh/m3 (Mizuta and originated from water–energy nexus (Yapıcıoğlu & Demir
Shimada 2010). 2021). Wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) are a typical
The process of decarbonizing wastewater treatment plants case of water–energy interactions.
has been a challenge, not only to mitigate emissions but also Currently, the measures to reduce carbon emission from
to generate self-reliance on their own energy generation that wastewater treatment plants mainly focus on the suitable
will contribute to sustainable behavior. treatment process, low-carbon emissions technologies
As the pursuit of “Decarbonization” gains momentum, and precise management methods (You et al. 2022). The
the emphasis on low-carbon solutions, emphasizing effectively assessing GHG emissions from wastewater
energy conservation and resource reuse, has introduced treatment plants and establishing dynamic changes of carbon
new challenges to conventional wastewater treatment emissions from each unit in the wastewater treatment process
approaches. Greenhouse gas emissions from a wastewater is of the utmost scientific importance for proposing measures
treatment plant are highly dependent on bioreactors and towards a decarbonized model. Energy consumption
electricity input from the grid (Maktabifard et al. 2018). and greenhouse gas emissions are important elements in
The estimated CO emissions from wastewater treatment determining the efficiency and obtain possible reductions in
2

--- Page 3 ---
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432 10417
cost of wastewater treatment in relation to the environmental economic development and increasing urbanization of Spain
effect (Yapicioğlu et al. 2023). has led to an expansion in the scale of wastewater treatment,
Also, wastewater treatment and distribution processes bringing great challenges for the development of WWTP’s
emit GHG emissions considering water–energy nexus. In with low carbon emissions and energy efficiency.
fact, energy consumption of the WWTPs should be a crucial The study, with the integral calculation model being
consideration of the water–energy nexus (Yapıcıoğlu and applied to determine the emission sources of each process
Demir 2021). unit and then to assess the energy conservation and reduction
Most of the current researches in Spain show the lack of of carbon emissions caused by the energy recovery of biogas
a detailed analysis of the wastewater treatment model. Some from the anaerobic digestion of sludge. Precisely evaluating
have focused only on the analysis of the decarbonization of and calculating carbon emissions in wastewater treatment
the WWTP economy through the generation of biogas as a plants, and establishing carbon–neutral operating models
renewable biofuel, as is the case of Gonzalez et al. (2022), has become a pivotal concern in the future of wastewater
which identifies and analyzes the main sources of odor and treatment and is the basis for formulating regional carbon
greenhouse gas emissions, determining the appropriate reduction plans. This analysis covers the calculation of the
performance of each unit in avoiding emissions. Blanco direct and indirect emissions of three GHGs (CO , N O
2 2
et al. (2016) show how an Anaerobic digestion is being and C H ) generated by the biological treatment process and
4
established as a standard technology to recover some of electricity consumption (IPCC 2014). The main innovative
the energy contained in the sludge in wastewater treatment aspect of this study was the use of mass and energy balances
plants as biogas. Rodríguez-Villanueva and Sauri (2021) for preliminary evaluation of the operation and approaches
show an exploration of relations between water treatments, for wastewater and sewage sludge treatment with focus on
water reuse, and governance. Colmenarejo et al. (2006) potential for sludge minimization, impact on other unit
focus on the comparison between different technologies. operations, energy requirement, energy self-sufficiency and
Lorenzo-Toja et al. (2016) basically concentrated on analysis emission inventories. Our goal is to offer valuable insights
of conventional water quality parameters, direct GHG and support for the practical implementation of wastewater
emissions and pharmaceuticals and personal care products environment management within the framework of carbon
(PPCPs) in water and sludge lines. neutrality and facilitate comprehensive GHG accounting,
Spain is one of the countries in the European Union that recognizes direct and indirect carbon emission sources in the
has made great progress in the wastewater treatment sector. wastewater treatment process. The article shows the need for
However, it is still in the process of identifying strategies future research where these data can be use used to evaluate
that allow it to reduce WWTPs energy demand and GHG modification and for developing strategies that tend towards
emissions in order to establish a decarbonization process. the implementation of objectives that achieve controlled and
It was estimated that urban water supply in Spain in 2021 adaptive decarbonization in WWTPs.
reached 3700 h m3/year and that wastewater treatment
exceeded 4000 hm3/year, requiring a large amount of energy
consumption (about 4000 GWh/year), which represents 1.5%
Materials and methods
of the total national energy demand and 0.5% of the total
greenhouse gas emissions in Spain (Ministry for Ecological
Transition and the Demographic Challenge 2022). This section presents and clarifies the steps taken for the
The sewerage, purification and wastewater reuse sector application of a methodology that focuses on determining
have an advantage, in that it not only consumes energy, but and analyzing the decarbonization process of the wastewater
is also capable of producing it. The national production of treatment system of the El Prat del Llobregat WWTP. To
energy in Spain is approximately 600 GWh/year, all of which analyse the impacts of WWTPs by reviewing the quantity
comes from renewable sources such as biogas, which is the of GHG emissions, the paper is structured as follows: Mass
main source of energy for the self-sustainability of the plant and Energy Balance Analysis, overview of GHG emissions
(AEAS-AGA 2022). However, Spain continues to have a (line water and sludge) and a current economic analysis for
serious problem in terms of energy dependence from abroad. decarbonization. In order to achieve this goal, a conceptual
For example, in 2017, 73.9% of the fuel needed to generate model is proposed that allows demonstrating each step to be
energy was obtained from countries such as Algeria, Saudi developed, as shown in Fig. 1.
Arabia and Nigeria, among others (European Union 2019). The sources of information were the Barcelona
The decarbonization process in Spain’s WWTPs has made Metropolitan Agency (AMB) and the Catalan Water
significant progress in relation to the European energy Agency (ACA). The database and statistical analysis of the
transition strategy. The generation of renewable energy by International Energy Agency (IEA), which contains reports
WWTPs is around 787 GWh/year (AEAS-AGA 2022). The on energy consumption and its percentages of emissions,

--- Page 4 ---
1 0418 International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432
Fig. 1 Conceptual framework of the study
was also used and provides clear guidelines for the transition and fine solid waste, in which it is possible to remove pieces
to clean energy. of paper, plastics, rags, rubber, metals, vegetable or fruit
waste. After this, the wastewater is conducted to a chamber
First step: analysis of the current situation
that removes the sand, fats, ashes and gravel, giving way to
a homogenization of the incoming flow to avoid harming
First, an in-depth reconnaissance and analysis of the El the subsequent processes (Asano et al. 2007).The secondary
Prat del Llobregat WWTP was carried out. This facility is process with biological reactor and nutrient removal ensures
located in Barcelona, Spain; it is responsible for treating a reduction in the concentration of phosphorus and nitrogen,
approximately 36% of the total water in the Barcelona through the process of nitrification and denitrification.
Metropolitan Area (AMB), including Cornellà de Llobregat, In turn, this process uses biological action to transform
El Prat del Llobregat, Esplugues de Llobregat, Hospitalet de biodegradable organic matter into stable matter, so that a
Llobregat, Sant Joan Despí, Sant Boi de Llobregat, Santa large percentage of suspended solids and organic compounds
Coloma de Cervelló and Sant Just Desvern (partially), are eliminated.
corresponding to a treatment capacity equivalent to The tertiary process allows the removal of the remaining
2,000,000 inhabitants. Catalonia has been experiencing a contaminants, in colloidal or suspended state, and reduces
period of drought, starting in the autumn of 2020, which the contaminant load of the wastewater. The techniques are
is considered historic due to its duration and intensity; in UV disinfection, ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis, one of
the spring of 2021, the drought was consolidated, and in the techniques most used by WWTPs (Arzate et al. 2019;
the years 2022 and 2023 it has intensified. Barcelona has Rossi et al. 2021).
been able to cope with this situation because its El Prat Sludge is an important by-product of wastewater treat-
del Llobregat WWTP is a treatment plant that includes ment systems, consisting of the majority of the solids sepa-
one of the largest water regeneration stations in the world, rated in each phase of the water line. The main objective of
generating a release of 50 million liters per year of water treating sludge is to reduce its volume by partially elimi-
resources for the region. Currently, part of the released flow nating the water content. This is done by means of gravity
is pushed upstream of the Llobregat River to a point, located thickening and centrifugation thickening for the biological
in Molins de Rei, where it is added to the river’s flow in pre- sludge, then it is subjected to anaerobic digestion and the
potable water condition. process ends with dehydration-conditioning and thermal
The facility purifies two types of wastewaters, domestic drying. Figure 2 shows the process currently being per-
and assimilable wastewater (water used in homes, offices, formed on site.
businesses, schools and any other space where no special According to data provided by the Barcelona Metropolitan
pollutants are discharged), and pre-treated industrial water Agency (AMB), this plant can treat up to 420,000 m3/d of
(water used in industrial facilities, after being treated by the wastewater and its average energy consumption for 2022 was
industry itself to extract the specific pollutants). This facility 155,683.40 kWh/day.
begins with a pre-treatment process that eliminates all coarse

--- Page 5 ---
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432 10419
Fig. 2 Wastewater Treatment Systems ‘El Prat del Llobregat’
Step two: mass and energy balance analysis modeled under annual average operational considerations
(excluding daily or seasonal variations) and a temperature of
The mass and energy balances in the WWTP are necessary 15 °C represented the average climatic conditions in Spain
in order to know and evaluate in detail the inflow and (AEMET 2023).
output of the wastewater to be treated and the respective The description of the relevant data is given in Table 1,
material and energy consumption. Mass and energy within the analysis of existing data provided by the
balances are proposed in this research as an important tool Barcelona Metropolitan Agency, as well as the use of
in the optimization of the plant’s operating system. This theoretical data.
analysis allows us to focus on the potential for minimizing The energy audit included the collection of data on
sludge and identifying energy-intensive processes, energy flows across the different stages of the treatment
reducing the impact of unit operations and increasing process, with the aim of assessing the energy performance
energy efficiency. and proposing improvements to achieve self-sustainability.
Several studies have demonstrated the benefits of energy First, all energy-consuming equipment was identified for
benchmarking for identifying the cost reduction potential direct measurement, establishing its nominal power and
and evaluating the operational performance of WWTP, as operating hours. Energy consumption was measured using
well as the decarbonization process (Krampe 2013; Svardal network analyzers for electrical energy and heat flow meters
and Kroiss 2011). for thermal processes. Data were collected throughout the
The calculations made in the mass balance were carried year 2022, enabling the analysis of monthly variations.
out under the iterative calculation procedure, managing to Based on the collected data, an energy balance was
evaluate the water and sludge treatment lines, as well as prepared, taking into account the following aspects:
the recirculation of secondary sludge streams. The mass (i) Energy consumed: Electrical energy used for equipment
balance evaluated the suspended solids of the wastewater operation and thermal energy for digestion processes.
of the tributary and the biological solids generated in the (ii) Energy generated: Potential energy from the produced
process that are distributed among the operations and unit biogas and its utilization for cogeneration. (iii) System
processes that make up the process flow diagram. Iteration efficiency: Ratio of generated energy to consumed energy.
was proposed for flow rate (Q), total suspended solids (TSS), The total electrical energy consumption of the El Prat de
and biological oxygen demand ( BOD ). The total system was Llobregat WWTP was an average of 47,327,754 kWh/year
5

--- Page 6 ---
1 0420 International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432
Table 1 Data relating to the
Tributary characteristics
operation of the wastewater
line (water treatment and Waste water flow 198 630 m3/d
regeneration) BOD 470 mg/L
5
Total suspended solids 529 mg/L
Total suspended solids after desanding Metcalf and Eddy (2018) (residuals 489 mg/L)
Primary sedimentation
BOD eliminated 63% of the plant inlet, non-primary inlet
5
generally includes drains 33%
Secondary process
Suspended Solids in slurry mixture 3.872 mg/L
Volatile Fraction of Suspended Solids in slurry mixture 73% SSVLM
Y (carbonaceous bacteria, cell waste and non- 0.53
obs
biodegradable SSVs in the tributary)
Tertiary process
Suspended Solids in slurry mixture 12.83 mg/L
Volatile Fraction of Suspended Solids in slurry mixture 95% SSVLM
BOD 4.67 mg/L
5
Characteristics of effluent
BOD 6 mgO/L
5 2
Suspended Solids 14 mg/L
in 2022, distributed in water lines: pre-treatment 16.35%, electricity consumption and by the emissions caused in the
primary treatment 5.18%, secondary treatment 45.23% and system. The three main GHGs that are analyzed in a waste-
tertiary treatment 14.88%. In the sludge line, energy con- water treatment plant are:
sumption is distributed as follows: thickening and dewater- Carbon Dioxide (CO ): This is attributed to two main
2
ing 6.84%, anaerobic digestion 2.51% and thermal drying factors, the treatment process itself and energy consumption.
1.31%. Self-consumption is represented by 12,224,746 kWh/ Methane (CH ): is produced from the biological
4
year, approximately 28.2%, and a surplus energy sale of degradation of organic matter under anaerobic conditions
36,591 kWh/day. Most of the energy used within the process from water or sludge blowdown. The level of methane
is supplied through the Spanish national grid. production will depend on the amount of organic matter
degraded in the process and the absence of dissolved oxygen.
Step three: greenhouse gas emissions analysis Nitrous Oxide (N O): is generated as a by-product during
2
nitrification and denitrification by the process of nutrient
The modelling used to estimate the amount of the GHGs removal, where it is transformed and emitted as nitrogen gas
produced by the El Prat del Llobregat WWTP was carried N as a direct emission, or as an indirect emission when the
2
out by means of empirical emission factors, based on effluent is discharged into a receiving medium.
the volume of treated water, effluent concentrations and This analysis covers the calculation of direct and indirect
mass of wastewater components removed. This emissions emissions of three GHGs: CO , N O and CH (electricity
2 2 4
assessment was carried out using the integral calculation consumption and chemicals). It is important to highlight that
model and the IPCC guidelines (IPCC 2006, 2019) to the formation of N O in wastewater treatment, specifically in
2
determine the emission sources of each process unit in the nitrification and denitrification stage, is very low due to
order to subsequently assess its energy consumption and the the highly efficient rates of nitrogen removal. The El Prat del
reduction of emissions with the use of biogas. Llobregat WWTP has an efficiency rate of 83.82%, which
Based on the data obtained in the mass and energy bal- indicates that the higher the level of nitrogen removal, the
ance of the operating system, the scope of impact gener- lower the amount of N O emitted. Therefore, the conversion
2
ated by the treatment of both the water line and sludge was rate of N O is transformed and emitted into N as a nitrogen
2 2
included. In this third step, the emissions produced from gas, so it is not taken into account in the calculation of GHG
the pre-treatment to the end of the treatment process are emissions. The carbon emission sources of the units are
quantified. The detail of this analysis is the assessment of summarized in Fig. 3 and Table 2.
the reduction of emissions by the recovery of biogas energy The GHG emissions associated with the use of the pur-
from the anaerobic digestion of sludge. Figure 3 shows chased energy are evaluated with the peninsular mix, as
the configuration of the specific sources of emissions by they can be affected by the mix of electricity generation.

--- Page 7 ---
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432 10421
Fig. 3 GHG emission source analysis of sewage plant operation
Table 2 Carbon emission analysis
Process Units Carbon emission reduction Indirect carbon emission Direct carbon emission
Electric energy Chemical CH CO NO
4 2 2
Wastewater Pretreatment X
treatment and Primary clarifier X X
reuse
Biological treatment— X X X X
Secondary sedimentation tank
Tertiary clarifier X X
Disinfection X X
Ultrafiltration and osmosis X
Effluent submarine outfall X X
Reuse X X
Sludge treatment Sludge thickening X X
Anaerobic mesophilic digestion X X
Dewatering X X
Sludge reuse Agriculture X X
Composting X X
Σ Carbon emission reduction Indirect carbon emission Direct carbon
emission
The emission factor of electricity is 0.259 kg CO₂-eq/kWh TotalCO =CH 4Emissions×28
2−eq
according to the National Commission of Markets and Com-
+N OEmissions×265 (1)
petition (CNMC). 2
+CO
2Electricity
Calculation of direct and indirect GHG emissions
where:
from WWTPs
TotalCO 2−eq = are the total CO 2−eq emissions of the
WWTP (kg CO 2−eq).
The analysis of the carbon emission pathway of the plant’s
CH Emissions(kgCH )
4 4
operations focused on the amounts of degradable organic
,N 2OEmissions(kgN 2O)andCO 2(kgCO 2−eq) emissions
matter, BOD and Total Nitrogen in the wastewater to deter-
5
from electricity consumption in each process. The values
mine the potential for greenhouse gas generation. WWTP’s
total annual GHG emissions are given by:

--- Page 8 ---
1 0422 International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432
for CH 4 global warming potential are 28 and 256 for N 2O QDOM = refers to the domestic wastewater amount
(IPCC 2019). treated in WWTPs (m3);
System GHG calculation limits: Kmass = refers to the coefficient of sludge production.
Direct sources of GHG emission in this study include
the wastewater treatment structure (e.g., primary Calculation of N 2O emissions The equation for calculating
sedimentation tank, biological reactors, secondary the total N O emitted by the nitrification and denitrifica-
2
sedimentation tank, tertiary treatment tanks) and sludge tion process is estimated as: (IPCC 2006, 2019).
thickening and dewatering facilities (thermal drying is not
44
N 2OEmission=N ×EF ×
currently operating). EFFLUENT EFFLUENT 28 (6)
Indirect sources of GHG emissions include the
consumption of electricity, the consumption of chemicals where;
within the wastewater treatment process and the N 2O Emission = N 2O emissions in inventory year, kg
sludge process. Similarly, in the biological process the N O/yr;
2
degradation of organic matter and reduction of nutrients N EFFLUENT = Nitrogen in the effluent discharge to
generates a release of CO of fossil origin, produced aquatic environments, kg N/yr;
2
directly by aerobic decomposition. However, they are not EF EFFLUENT =emission factor for N 2O emissions from
controlled and there is no rough estimate. discharged to wastewater, kgN O-N/kg N; conversion of
44 2
kg N into kg N O.
282O-N 2
Calculation of C H 4 emissions Following IPCC guidelines,
C H 4 emissions (IPCC 2006, 2019) are estimated as: Calculation of C O 2 emissions The C O 2 emissions emit-
ted in the biological treatment of the El Prat de Llobregat
CH =Emissions=(TOW Plant−S OC)×EF 1−R
4 (2)
WWTP are given by:
where: CO =EF ×COD
2,bio bio,CO2 removed (7)
TOW Plant = is the organics in wastewater of WWTP (kg
BOD); where:
SOC = is the organic component in the sludge of CO 2,bio = emissions (g CO 2eq/year) from biological
WWTPs (kg BOD); treatment processes;
EF 1 = is the CH 4 emission factor for WWTP kg CH 4/ EF bio,CO2 = (g CO 2/kg COD removed) are three GHG
kg BOD); emission factors of the process.
R = is the amount of CH 4 recovered (kg CH 4). COD removed = is the annually removed COD (kg COD
Degradable organic compounds in wastewater are removed/year) in the WWTP.
calculated as:
Calculation of C O emissions from electricity consumption
TOW =P×BOD×0,001×I×356 2
Plant (3) (E e)
The consumption of electrical energy for wastewater
treatment is calculated using annual energy consumption
where:
P = is the urban population (person); and specific emission factors:
BOD = is per capita BOD (g BOD/person/day); E =D×EF ×10−3
e D (8)
I = is the correction factor for additional industrial BOD
discharged into sewers (for collected the default is 1.25, where:
for uncollected the default is 1.00). E e = is the indirect emission of carbon from the
The organic component in the sludge is given by: consumption of electrical energy (tCO /day);
2
S =S ×K D = is the total electricity from wastewater treatment
OC mass OC (4)
(kWh/day);
EF D = is the carbon emission factor for electric power
S =Q ×K
mass DOM mass (5) generation and the value is 0.259 kg CO₂-eq/kWh in
Spain’s electricity grid.
where:
Smass is the amount of sludge produced in WWTPs
Carbon emission from chemicals 𝐄 𝐜 Indirect carbon emis-
(kg sludge);
KOC = is the organic composition factor in sludge, set sions from the use of chemicals are limited (Zhang et al.
2020); however, the IPCC emissions accounting frame-
as 0.25 (kg BOD/kg sludge) (Hao et al. 2020);
work recommends including emissions caused during the
production process of the chemical (Foley et al. 2010).

--- Page 9 ---
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432 10423
The calculation of emissions of the chemicals was shows the input and output values for treated volumes, total
calculated as: suspended solids, BOD and total nitrogen.
As can be seen in Fig. 4, for the treated flow 198,630
E =M ×EF +M ×EF +M ×EF
c c c d d W W (9) m3/d, the influent characteristics of COD = 904.55 mg/L,
where: BOD = 470 mg/L, SST = 528.91 mg/L and
E c (tCO 2/day) = carbon emissions in chemical production. NT = 77.15 mg/L. In the primary treatment, an approxi-
Mc, Md and M w (tCO 2/day) = is the amount of additional mate BOD removal of 58,814.34 kg/d (62.52%), a total
carbon source, chemical agents or reactants, and substances suspended solids removal of 72,847.55 kg/d, including
for sludge dewatering, respectively (data provided for El Prat part of the initial drainage process equivalent to 75%, and
de Llobregat WWTP). an organic matter elimination of 35% is achieved. The bio-
EFc, EF d and EF w (kgCO 2/kg) = are the carbon emission logical reactor and secondary decanter are highly efficient
factors for additional carbon sources, disinfection agents in nutrient removal, nitrogen is reduced to 12.48 mg/L,
and sludge dewatering agents, respectively. Greenhouse gas representing 83.82% elimination. This stage of the pro-
emission factors during the production process were obtained cess is important because it removes more than 95% of the
from related literature (Li et al. 2020; Niu et al. 2013; Zhou suspended solids and organic matter, with characteristics
et al. 2022) and from data provided in the IPCC guide (IPCC BOD = 1,191.78 kg/d, SST = 2,780.8 kg/d and a final flow
2006). of 183,795.35 m 3/d, of which 134,784 m3/d is sent for
regeneration and 70,896 m3/d is sent for discharge into
Results and discussion the medium. Finally, the advanced regeneration process
achieves effluent quality with optimal parameters. The
Mass balance released flow is pushed upstream of the Llobregat River,
where it is added to the river flow in pre-potable water
The calculation and analysis of the mass balance of the El condition and in turn is used in agricultural and garden
Prat del Llobregat wastewater treatment plant made it possible irrigation, for industrial purposes and for the maintenance
to highlight the hotspots in which an improvement in the of the flow of the Llobregat River.
efficiency of the process is required, along with the recovery As a result of the sludge treatment, a final production
of energy and resources. This deterministic and analytical of dewatered sludge equivalent to 2,168,000 kg MF/day
model showed clearly that primary treatment eliminates much was calculated, with 52,208 tMF/year, almost 90% of the
of the slow and non-biodegradable fraction of COD from the sludge, being allocated to direct agriculture and 5902 tMF/
tributary. year (equivalent to 10%) to composting.
The presence of primary sedimentation results in increased Biogas is composed of a mixture of Methane (CH 4),
sludge production as a first result. 1.3% of the sludge is related Carbon Dioxide (CO 2), Nitrogen (N 2), Hydrogen Sulfide
to the same non-reactive behavior of the primary settling, ( H 2S) and some trace amounts of Hydrogen (H 2). The
which indicates that the sludge obtained in the primary set- calorific value of CH 4 shows the useful potential of the
tling is not subject to biological processes, as is the case with energy produced in the anaerobic digestion treatment. For
the secondary sludge. In the primary settling process, much of every kilogram of volatile solids, approximately 1.7 kg of
the slow and non-biodegradable COD fraction of the influent COD is removed, and for every kilogram of COD removed,
is removed and the effluent that is sent to secondary treatment 0.35 N m3 of CH 4 methane is generated, and the biogas
(secondary settling and biological process) contains a higher generation rate (GR) is 1,12 m3 biogas/tVS.
fraction of biodegradable substrates. In the biological process, Currently, the amount of CH 4 in the biogas stream
biological tanks are designed to withstand lower volumetric is 62.76%. The amount of volatile solids (VS) that are
loads (VLRs). This allows for a higher observed yield ( Y ) removed in the flow is 35%, thus obtaining biogas
obs
of 0.45 where carbonaceous bacteria, cellular waste and non- production of 20,146 Nm3/day and electricity production
biodegradable SSV are eliminated in the tributary. Table 3 of 13,205,657 kWh/year.
The analysis of the mass balance shows that the biologi-
cal reactor and the secondary decanter managed a COD
Table 3 Quality of incoming
Treated water SS [mg/L] COD [mg/L] BOD [mg/L] NT [mg/L]
and outgoing water of the El volume (m3/d)
Prat del Llobregat WWTP
Influent water quality 198,690 528.91 904.55 470 77.15
Effluent water quality 134,784 13.75 37.67 5.92 11.23

--- Page 10 ---
1 0424 International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology (2025) 22:10415–10432
Fig. 4 Plant-wide mass and energy for reference plant “Prat del Llobregat”
removal rate of 91.85% due to the high capacity of the to multiply the potential values (P) by the operating time of
plant; however, this implies that the biological degrada- each device in the water and sludge line. The intensity of
tion of the COD of the effluent has been released as carbon energy consumption per cubic meter of wastewater treatment
dioxide into the air. could decrease due to the size of the plant and the effects
of economies of scale; this indicates that unit treatment
Energy balance
costs would be lower, increasing the profit margin with the
reduction of energy purchases.
The energy requirements of the wastewater treatment The energy demand of the preliminary treatment is
plant have been calculated with reference to the energy around 0.11 kWh/m3, which represents 16.35% of the total
consumption parameter per unit of volume treated. This energy demand of the treatment process. In the primary
parameter is preferred because it allows showing a posteriori treatment, 70% of the total suspended solids (TSS) and
the relationship with the pollutant load that occurs in the 53.15% of the biological oxygen demand (BOD) were
treatment process of the water and sludge line. removed. In the secondary treatment with a biological
The El Prat del Llobregat WWTP consumed an amount process, consumption of 0.30 kWh/m3 is observed, being
of electricity equivalent to 47,327,754 kWh per total annual the process that consumes the largest amount of energy. The
activity, representing a consumption of 155,683 kWh/ energy requirement demanded by this secondary process is
day. This requirement is met by the supply of electricity mainly linked to the necessary energy used by the aerators,
purchased from the national grid (around 70%), along with its consuming 45.23% of the total energy needed by the WWTP.
own self-consumption by cogeneration of 13,752,588 kWh/ The final flow sent by marine outfall is 71,261 m3/d. The
year, obtaining 1,140,8340 kWh/year of thermal energy from flow rate sent for tertiary treatment is 134,784 m3/d, with
motors and 3,332,770 kWh/year energy provided by boilers. energy consumption of 14.88%, as shown in Table 4.
This process allows for self-consumption of approximately A higher quality of the effluent results in higher energy
29.45% of the plant’s electrical energy. To estimate the total consumption (Svardal and Kroiss 2011), so when primary
electrical energy consumption of the plant, it was necessary sedimentation is available it contributes to a decrease in