--- Page 1 ---
pubs.acs.org/est Article
Flexible Carbon Source Regulation for Mitigating Greenhouse Gas
Emissions in Full-Scale Wastewater Treatment
⊥ ⊥
Yun-Peng Song, Li-Li Du, Bao-Gui Wang, Ling-Min Zhang, Hong-Yong Lin, Fang Ma, Yu Bai,
Ai-Jie Wang,* Hong-Cheng Wang,* and Nan-Qi Ren
CiteThis:Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528 ReadOnline
ACCESS *
Metrics&More ArticleRecommendations sı SupportingInformation
.selcitra
ABSTRACT: Achieving carbon neutrality in wastewater treatment
dehsilbup plants (WWTPs) by 2060 requires effective strategies to mitigate
.)CTU( greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This study explores the potential
of flexible carbon source regulation to reduce GHG emissions while
erahs improving the nutrient removal efficiency under varying influent
44:15:70
conditions. A plant-wide model was developed, calibrated with one
yletamitigel yearofhourlymonitoringdata,toquantifyGHGemissionsinafull-
scale WWTP. We evaluated three carbon regulation strategies:
ta
6202 anaerobic digestion (AD), short fermentation (SF), and adaptive
carbon source regulation (ACSR). Results show that AD was most
,52 ot
woh effective in high carbon-to-nitrogen (C/N) ratios, reducing GHG
yaM
emissions by 29.2%. SF performed best at low C/N ratios, reducing
no
no snoitpo N 2 O emissions by 56.3%. The ACSR strategy, which dynamically
VINU adjusts between AD and SF based on influent C/N, achieved a total GHG reduction of 18.2% compared with the base strategy
(conventional activated sludge process with mechanical dewatering and landfill disposal of waste sludge). Seasonal variations
TSEWHTRON rof significantlyimpactedemissions(p<0.001),whileC/Nratios,althoughnotstatisticallysignificantinisolation,playacrucialrolein
senilediuggnirahs/gro.sca.sbup//:sptth influencingN Oemissionsandsludgeproduction,emphasizingtheneedforadaptivecarbonallocation.Thisstudyunderscoresthe
2
viability of plant-wide, data-driven carbon source regulation as an integrated approach to achieving net-zero emissions inWWTPs,
effectively addressing diverse GHG emission sources within the system.
KEYWORDS: GHG emissions, carbon source regulation, full-scale WWTP, plant-wide model
aiv
dedaolnwoD
1. INTRODUCTION There exists a positive correlation between energy con-
sumption and influent chemical oxygen demand (COD)
Amid increasing global urbanization and intensifying impacts
levels.4 Stringent effluent standards necessitate sufficient
ofclimatechange,theneedtojointlymanagewaterpollutants
carbon sources to sustain the efficiency of nitrogen and
and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from wastewater
phosphorus removal by denitrifying bacteria and polyphos-
eeS treatment plants (WWTPs) is critical. From a life cycle
phate-accumulating organism (PAO). Inadequate carbon
perspective, WWTPs contribute to GHG emissions through
sourcesleadtoincreaseduseofsupplementarycarbonsources
three primary sources: direct emissions from biological
and phosphorus removal chemicals.5,6 Additionally, the excess
processes, indirect emissions from imported energy and
sludge generated from COD conversion produces substantial
chemicals, and emissions from the downstream disposal of
GHG emissions during treatment and disposal, underscoring
sewage sludge and transportation of sewage sludge.1 The
the need for optimized sludge management to mitigate CH
wastewatertreatmentsector,responsiblefor5%ofglobalnon- 4
and N O emissions.7 Diurnal variations in N O emissions are
CO GHG emissions, notably methane (CH ) and nitrous 2 2
2 4 strongly correlated with changes in the influent ammonium
oxide (N O), consumes 1% of global energy and emits 601
2 nitrogen load to the aerated zones of the activated sludge
MtCO 2 annually.2,3 Effective mitigation strategies are essential process.8 However, given that influent characteristics are not
for steering this sector toward carbon neutrality by 2060�
China’s national decarbonization target. GHG emissions are
influenced by influent characteristics and operational energy/ Received: November18,2024
materialconsumption,complicatingemissionmechanismsand Revised: May3, 2025
posing challenges to mitigation efforts. Accepted: May5, 2025
Elucidating the determinants of GHG emissions in waste- Published: May9, 2025
watertreatmentsystems,particularlyinfluentcharacteristics,is
crucial for sustainable environmental management practices.
©2025AmericanChemicalSociety https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
9517 Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 2 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
controllable variables, it is imperative to focus on optimizing model to evaluate the dynamic GHG emissions under
energy and material usage in treatment processes tailored to proposed carbon source regulation strategies and discussed
specific influent characteristics to effectively mitigate GHG in detail the potential mitigation mechanisms. Finally, we
emissions. explored the effects of carbon source regulation strategies on
Carbon source regulation offers a promising approach for GHGemissionsandnutrientremovalefficiencyunderdifferent
targeted GHG mitigation strategies based on influent influent C/N ratios. The findings suggest that flexible carbon
characteristics by altering carbon distribution within source regulation could be a potential strategy for mitigating
WWTPs.9,10 Optimizing carbon mass flow allocation within a GHG emissions under varying influent conditions and
WWTP yields numerous benefits,11 so it is reasonable to providing a practical systematic approach for achieving net-
hypothesizethatdifferentinfluentC/Nratioscanbemanaged zero emissions in WWTPs.
byregulatingthedistributionandutilizationofcarbonsources
to mitigate GHG emissions from WWTPs. However, current 2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
approachestocarbonregulationfallintothreecategories,each 2.1. Full-Scale Plant Layout and Process Description.
with significant limitations. First, external carbon source Thefull-scaleWWTPlocatedinHenanProvince,China,based
supplementation (e.g., methanol or acetate) increases both onanactivatedsludgeprocess,wasthefocusofthisstudy.The
operational costs and GHG emissions.12 Second, internal WWTP predominantly treats municipal wastewater, with a
carbon source utilization methods, such as the anaerobic/ minor industrial contribution, and was originally designed to
aerobic/anoxic(AOA)process,13,14facilitatestorageandusage handle an average dry weather flow of 300,000 m3/d and
of PHA and glycogen for denitrification, with studies showing consisted of 4 parallel modules. The influent to the plant
internal carbon can drive approximately 30% of nitrogen undergoes preliminary treatment, including screening, degrit-
removal in full-scale plants.15−17 However, these approaches ting,andprimaryclarification(PRIM),followedbyanaerobic−
present notable GHG-related concerns, as denitrification anoxic−aerobic (AAO) treatment processes, a secondary
driven by internal carbon sources might actually produce clarifier (SEC), and disinfection via sodium hypochlorite
more N 2O,18 and they primarily focus on enhancing nitrogen (NaClO) to eradicate pathogenic microorganisms, thus
removal rather than comprehensive GHG mitigation. Third, ensuring effluent safety. The excess sludge is thickened
existing carbon recovery strategies such as anaerobicdigestion (THK) and, together with the primary sludge from PRIM, is
(AD)andshortfermentation(SF)typicallyoperatewithfixed subjected to dewatering (DEW) with the addition of
parameters regardless of influent variability, optimizing for poly(acrylamide) (PAM), after which it is transported for
either energy recovery or nutrient removal but not both landfilling (Figure S2). The return liquor from the thickening
simultaneously.Theinteractionbetweencarbonallocationand and dewatering presses is recirculated to the plant’s inlet.
GHG emissions across different plant units remains poorly 2.2. Sampling Campaigns, Analytical Methods, and
understood, particularly under varying C/N ratios. Therefore, DataReconciliation.Thesamplingcampaigncomprisedtwo
there exists a critical need for an adaptive strategy that can extensive monitoring periods: from 1st to 31st Aug 2021
dynamically adjust internal carbon flows between different (summer) and 1st to 28th Feb 2022 (winter), as these
treatment pathways based on influent characteristics to represent the extremes in both operational conditions and
optimize both GHG mitigation and effluent quality across all treatment performance at our study site. Daily grab samples
operational conditions. were collected for subsequent analysis from the following
Furthermore,plant-widemodelingoffersarobustframework locations:rawwastewaterinfluent,PRIM,ANA,ANOX,AER,
forthecomprehensiveassessmentofdiversecontrolstrategies, SEC,andfinaleffluent(EFF).Toverifytherepresentativeness
including sludge management,19 operational parameters,20,21 of daily sampling, hourly samples were also collected from
and nutrient recovery options.22 However, comprehensive these locations between 9:00 and 16:00 during intensive
model validation with full-scale data remains challenging, monitoring campaigns in both summer and winter periods
particularlyforGHGemissions.Existingstudieshaveprimarily (Figure S4).
focusedoneitherCH orN Oemissionsindividually,withfew Furthermore, the influent and effluent quality were
4 2
addressing both simultaneously. Most validation efforts have monitored on a daily basis for a year (July 2021−Jun 2022).
been limited to short-term monitoring periods or steady-state Total suspended solids (TSS) and volatile suspended solids
conditions, lacking a consideration of seasonal variations and (VSS) were measured using standard methods.23 Total
dynamic influent characteristics. These limitations can be chemical oxygen demand (TCOD), soluble chemical oxygen
attributed to technical challenges in continuous GHG demand (SCOD), total nitrogen (TN), nitrate (NO −),
3
monitoring, high costs associated with long-term data ammonium (NH +), total phosphate (TP), and phosphate
4
collection, and the complexity in capturing interactions (PO −) were measured by Hach methods (Hach Company,
4
between water and sludge treatment lines. Nevertheless, Loveland, Colorado). Data regarding dosed chemicals such as
validated instances of plant-wide models remain limited, PAM and NaClOwere obtained from historical plant records.
primarily due to the scarcity of comprehensive and reliable A comprehensive data reconciliation framework was
databasesfromfull-scaleWWTPs,particularlyconcerningCH implemented to verify mass balances across all sampling
4
and N O emissions.20,22 locations. The reconciled data set demonstrated excellent
2
Thisstudyaddressescarbonsourceallocationandutilization closure of mass balances with minimal adjustments to
under GHG constraints through dynamic simulation of a full- measuredvalues(<0.5%)whilesignificantlyreducingmeasure-
scale WWTP, supported by on-site data collection. A mentuncertainties.Detailedreconciliationresultsareprovided
comprehensive plant-wide model, calibrated with a year of in the Supporting Information.
hourly monitoring data, was developed to quantify GHG 2.3. Measurement of CH and N O Emissions. The
4 2
emissions and evaluate the relationship between influent emissionratesofCH andN Oweremeasuredeverydaybya
4 2
quality and emissions. Subsequently, the study utilized the portable Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) gas analyzer
9518 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 3 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
coupled with a floating hood, positioned at four points along wasdirectedtoacombinedheatandpower(CHP)unit(39%
the aeration tank to calculate the mean value. As shown in electrical,45%thermalefficiency)forenergyrecovery.TheSF
Figure S3, the emitted gas was first collected by a floating process was operated semicontinuously with a 2 day HRT
hood,whichwasthenpassedtotheportableFTIRgasanalyzer under controlled mesophilic conditions (∼35 °C) and
via a polypipe, with a dehumidifier for moisture removal. A maintained at pH 10 using NaOH dosing. This optimized
flowmeter, corrected for temperature and pressure, was set up VFA production (yield: 0.25−0.30 g VFA/g VSS; concen-
torecordthegas flow inthegas pipe. Theemissionrate from tration: 2500−3500 mg/L as Ac eq), converting sludge into a
hood (M , kg/(m2·d)) was determined by the emission valuable carbon source while inhibiting methanogenesis. The
g,hood
flow rate (Q , m3/d), concentration of the targeted GHG produced VFAs were redirected to enhance denitrification.
g,hood
(C ,kg/m3),andsurfaceareaofthehood(A ,m2)using Detailed process parameters are provided in Table S32 of the
g,hood hood
eq 1 Supporting Information.
2.4.2.ModelCalibration.ThemodifiedSumo4Nmodelhas
Q × C
g,hood g,hood 384 dynamic parameters, stoichiometric parameters, and 15
M =
g,hood A waterqualityparameters.Acomprehensivelistingofallkinetic
hood (1)
andstoichiometricparameters,includingprocessmatrices,rate
While direct measurements using the FTIR gas analyzer equations, and sensitivity analysis results, is provided in the
were conducted at the aeration tank, the plant-wide model Supporting Information. Parameter sensitivity was evaluated
(described in Sections 2.4 and 2.5) accounts for GHG using one-way sensitivity analysis with relative sensitivity
emissions from all process units within the WWTP. Recent functions (RSFs). Parameters were varied by +10% from their
studieshaveshownthatbothprimarytreatmentandsecondary defaultvalueswhilekeepingothersconstant.Parameterswith|
clarifiers can release dissolved N O and CH generated from RSF| ≥ 0.1 were identified as critical, resulting in 50
2 4
upstream processes. Sludge treatment units, particularly those parameters significantly influencing GHG emissions. These
with anaerobic digestion, can contribute significantly to total parametersprimarilygovernmicrobialgrowthkinetics,oxygen
CH emissions.24 The aeration tank measurements served transfer, and carbon transformation processes. A comprehen-
4
primarily for model calibration and validation, while the sive listing of all kinetic and stoichiometric parameters,
comprehensive model captures emissions throughout the including process matrices, rate equations, and sensitivity
treatment train. analysisresults,isprovidedintheSupportingInformation.For
2.4.Full-ScalePlant-WideModelDevelopment.Inthis modelcalibration,keyparameterswereheldconstant,while50
study, SUMO v.22 (Dynamita, France) was utilized as the critical parameters were selected for one-way sensitivity
simulation platform for developing process schemes, calibrat- analysis to assess their impact on effluent quality. Model
ing parameters, and running models due to its open-source calibration was conducted in two stages: steady-state
plant-wide GHG modeling framework and flexibility in model calibration, followed by dynamic calibration. Steady-state
development, which were essential for implementing and calibration used mean values of data from monitoring in Aug
validating the proposed carbon source regulation strategies. 2021 (summer) and February 2022 (winter). Samples were
2.4.1. Model Description. SumoSlang, a proprietary collected from key locations (as mentioned in Section 2.2) to
modeling language within the SUMO software, was employed estimate parameters specifically for steady-state conditions.
to further customize and develop the Sumo4N model. This The steady-state calibration used the Nelder−Mead simplex
enhanced model incorporates the dynamics of sludge alkaline optimizationalgorithmtominimizediscrepanciesbetweenthe
fermentation, with a particular focus on the role of free simulated and observed values, targeting an acceptable error
ammonia (FA). FA is crucial, as it facilitates hydrolysis while threshold to accurately reflect steady-state conditions.
simultaneously inhibiting acetogenesis and methanogenesis. Estimates of the kinetic parameters from the steady-state
This dual functionality is explicitly represented in the model, simulations were used to initiate dynamic simulations.
which significantly improves the prediction accuracy for Dynamic calibration used time-series data, including daily
fermentation products and precisely characterizes the inter- monitoring of effluent quality over a year before the
action between hydrolytic and methanogenic activities.25 The implementation of the mitigation strategy (Jul 2021−Jun
core features of the original Sumo4N model include a 2022),asdescribedinSection2.2,tocapturesystemvariability
comprehensive depiction of essential biochemical processes, under operational conditions. The Nelder−Mead algorithm
such as microbial growth and COD/N/P removal, as well as was applied again to adjust parameter values and minimize
GHG production pathways, gas transfer dynamics, and discrepancies between model predictions and observed time-
chemical precipitation processes. Additional insights into the dependent effluent quality.20
Sumo4N model can be found in a previous study.20 The 2.5. GHG Emission Quantification. Different GHG
updated model was used to simulate various carbon source compounds (CH and N O), as well as their emission types
4 2
regulation strategies and evaluate their impacts on GHG and sources (direct or indirect), were accounted for in the
emissions and treatment efficiency. model. Estimates not explicitly calculated by the submodels
The activated sludge system was configured in an A/A/O wereestimatedfollowingthecomprehensivemethodology.27,28
sequence consisting of three tanks in series. The PRIM, SEC, Following IPCC guidelines, WWTPs’ GHG emissions are
THK, and DEW were modeled as ideal units, assuming no categorized into three scopes: (1) direct process emissions
biological activity and maintaining a constant percentage of from biological treatment (Scope 1), (2) indirect emissions
TSS in the concentrated sludge flows.26 The AD unit was from energy consumption (Scope 2), and (3) other indirect
operated as a completely mixed reactor (20,000 m3) under emissions from chemical production, sludge handling, and
mesophilic conditions (35 ± 1 °C) with a 25 day HRT, disposal (Scope 3).29
achieving45−55%volatilesolid(VS)reduction.Theproduced Scope 1 encompasses direct emissions from all treatment
biogas(yield:∼0.35m3/kgofVSSremoved;∼65−70%CH ) unitswithintheWWTPfenceline,frominfluententrythrough
4
9519 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 4 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
effluent discharge. This includes N 2O (SP1_N 2O) and CH 4 simplicity compared to continuous-flow systems. This
emissions (SP1_CH 4). N 2O is generated during biological configurationofferedbettercontroloffermentationtime
nitrogenremovalviathenitriteandincompletehydroxylamine thanconventionalCSTRswhileavoidingthecomplexity
oxidation pathways of ammonia-oxidizing and heterotrophic of plug-flow reactors, making it particularly suitable for
denitrification pathways of heterotrophic organisms. CH 4 was dynamic adaptation to fluctuating influent C/N
mainlygeneratedduringanaerobicdigestion.DissolvedCH 4in conditions. VFAs are used to enhance denitrification
the digester effluent is assumed to be fully stripped in the and phosphorus removal in mainstream processes.
subsequent processing units and emitted to the atmosphere.
• Theadaptive carbon sourceregulation (ACSR) strategy
CO emissions, mainly derived from biogenic carbon, are
2 combines anaerobic digestion and fermentation to
excluded from the GHG emissions inventory as proposed by
benefitfrombothenergyrecoveryandVFAproduction.
the IPCC 2019 approach.30 While fossil carbon exists in
Wasted sludge is distributed between AD and SF based
wastewater, its quantification faces significant technical and
on the influent C/N ratios, to optimize carbon source
economic constraints.31,32 N O and CH emissions are
2 4 utilization. Specifically, when influent C/N drops below
converted into units of CO equivalents by Global Warming
2 athresholdof6,100%ofthesludgeisdirectedtoSFto
Potentials (GWP). The GWP for a 100 year time horizon for
maximize VFA supply; conversely, when C/N is ≥6,
N O and CH are 265 kg CO /kg N O and 28 kg CO /kg
2 4 2 2 2 sludgeissplit(e.g.,90%toAD,10%toSF)toprioritize
CH , respectively.33
4 energy recovery while maintaining sufficient VFA (Text
Scope 2 covers indirect emissions from electricity con-
S4).
sumption,boundedfrompowergenerationtothepointofuse
at the WWTP. Energy consumption, involving pumping, The study evaluates the impact of each strategy on GHG
mixing, and aeration, is calculated according to a previous emissions,operationalcosts,andtreatmentefficiency.Theflow
study.34 Energy production is electricity generated by the diagrams provided in the Supporting Information (Figure S9)
anaerobic digestion turbine. According to the “average carbon detail the operational flow of each strategy, illustrating the
dioxideemissionfactorofChina’sregionalpowergridin2012” integration of technological components and process mod-
reprinted by the National Development and Reform ifications. By comparing these strategies under various
Commission and the China Electricity Council, the value of operational scenarios, the study aims to identify the most
the power grid in central China is 0.5257 kg CO /kW h. sustainable approach for carbon management in wastewater
2
Scope3includesindirectemissionsfromupstreamchemical treatment, contributing to the broader goals of environmental
production through delivery and downstream sludge manage- protection and sustainability in the sector.
mentfrom dewatering throughfinal disposal,within a 100km
transportation radius. This includes chemical usage 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(SP3_CHEM) and wasted sludge disposal (SP3_SLUDGE). 3.1.GHG Emissionand ModelValidation of the Base
2.6. Carbon Source Regulation Strategies. This study WWTP. Figure 1 illustrates the GHG emissions and model
focuses on evaluating the effectiveness of four distinct carbon
predictionsfromtwoseparatemonth-longsamplingcampaigns
source control strategies designed to mitigate GHG emissions
at the wastewater treatment facility. Despite fluctuations in
in wastewater treatment. Each strategy is distinct in its
influent COD fractions due to seasonal changes (Figure S11),
approach to managing carbon sources and aims to optimize
the plant maintained stable removal efficiencies for organic
both the environmental and operational performance of the
matter, nitrogen, and phosphorus. In the summer, influent
treatment processes. The strategies include the following: concentrations averaged 215.5± 49.4 mg/Lfor COD,32.1 ±
• Thebasestrategyrepresentstheconventionaltreatment 7.3 mg/L for TN, and 2.5 ± 0.6 mg/L for TP. Effluent levels
configuration where waste activated sludge undergoes weresignificantlyreducedto17.6±3.0mg/L,9.8±1.4mg/L,
mechanicaldewateringandlandfilldisposal,withoutAD and 0.2 ± 0.1 mg/L, achieving removal rates of 91.8 ± 4.2%,
orotherredirectingcarbonflowsforenhancedtreatment 69.6 ± 27.3%, and 93.7 ± 4.2%, respectively. During winter,
performance. In this configuration, the excess sludge influentconcentrationsroseto341.9±121.6mg/LforCOD,
from the secondary clarifier is thickened, dewatered 44.0 ± 7.9 mg/L for TN, and 5.8 ± 2.1 mg/L for TP. The
using PAM as a flocculant, and then transported for effluent concentrations during this season were 18.0 ± 6.0,
landfill disposal. 10.8±1.1,and0.2±0.1mg/L,resultinginimprovedremoval
efficiencies of 94.7 ± 4.2%, 75.6 ± 3.5%, and 96.2 ± 3.6%.
• The anaerobic digestion (AD) strategy integrates
Throughoutthestudy,theeffluentconsistentlymetClass1A,a
anaerobic digestion to recover energy from sludge. An
stringent effluent standard implemented in China,35 demon-
anaerobic digester and combined heat and power unit
strating the plant’s robust performance and adaptability to
are used to produce energy from biogas under
seasonal variations. This highlights the plant’s capability to
mesophilic conditions (35 °C). The biogas is used to
effectively manage varying influent conditions while ensuring
generate electricity and heat to support facility
environmental compliance.
operations.
For long-term model validation, we analyzed a one-year
• The short fermentation (SF) strategy recovers VFAs monitoring data set during the implementation of Class 1A
from sludge through short-term fermentation. Sodium standards (COD <30 mg/L, TN < 10 mg/L, TP < 0.3 mg/L,
hydroxide (NaOH) is added via a proportional- NH + < 1.5 mg/L). Statistical analysis revealed that all key
4
derivative controller to maintain a pH of 10, promoting parameters demonstrated typical variability for full-scale
hydrolysis, acidogenesis, and inhibiting methanogenesis. WWTPs, with coefficient of variation values within expected
This study employed a semicontinuous operation for ranges: COD (23.0%), TN (14.5%), TP (30.5%), NH +
4
short fermentation with daily sludge replacement, (34.2%), and MLSS (8.2%). The outlier analysis identified a
chosen for its operational stability and maintenance small percentage of anomalous points (0.8−3.8% across
9520 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 5 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
Figure 2. Dynamic simulation (red lines) and measurements (blue
points) for effluent (a) COD, (b) NH+, (c) TN, (d) TP, and (e)
4
Figure 1. Plant-wide measurements (box plots) and steady-state
MLSSinthe aeration tank.
model predictions (red stars) at different plant locations in two
samplingcampaigns(1st−31stAug2021,1st−28thFeb2022).(a,b)
variations in the C/N ratios, which were well captured by
SCOD, (c,d) NO−, (e,f) NH+, (g,h)PO3−, (i,j) MLSS, (k,l) CH
3 4 4 4 the summer and winter sampling campaigns. These findings
emissions, and(m,n) NOemissions (n =31, n = 28).
2 summer winter were corroborated by the initial calibration approach and
support the robustness of the plant-wide model in capturing
parameters), all of which were validated against operational critical operational boundaries.
records. The proposed model effectively simulates the key 3.2. Key Factors Influencing GHG Emissions. Identify-
transformations of organics, nitrogen, and phosphorus across ingtheprimaryGHGemissionsourcesoftheWWTPandthe
multiple units in the flow diagram, achieving an average key parameters influencing them is critical for developing
deviation of just 7.8%. As illustrated in Figure 2, the dynamic effectivemitigationstrategies.Figure3aillustratesthemonthly
simulationsaccuratelyforecasteffluentqualityparameterssuch dynamicsofscope-basedGHGemissions,revealingsubstantial
as COD, NH +, TN, and TP. The mean absolute percentage seasonal variations. These data indicate significantly elevated
4
error (MAPE) for the model is 20.8%, 30.2%, 22.8%, and emissions during two distinct periods: September to
32.1%, respectively, indicating a strong alignment between November (Period I, low C/N) and from February to May
predicted and observed values. These low error rates confirm (Period II, high C/N). During Period I, emissions range from
the model’s robustness in predicting effluent quality. Both 139.9 to 163.6 tCO /d, while in Period II, they range from
2
simulationsandplantmeasurementshighlightnotableseasonal 163.8 to 172.5 tCO /d. An analysis of the composition of
2
variations in the N O and CH emissions from the aeration GHG emissions reveals that the major contributing sources
2 4
tank. N O emissions ranged from 0.2% to 1.4% of incoming differ significantly between these two periods: SP1_N O
2 2
nitrogen, consistent with findings from other full-scale dominatesduringPeriodI,whereasSP3_SLUDGEisthemain
reports.36−38 This order-of-magnitude variation was primarily contributor during Period II.
attributed to differences in the carbon source availability for Statistical analysis using a two-way ANOVA revealed that
denitrification. seasonal variations had a significant effect on total GHG
To further evaluate the temporal dynamics of the influent emissions(F=8.8,p<0.05),whiletheinfluenceofC/Nratios
C/N ratio, an additional 9 year data set of monthly water was not statistically significant (F = 2.9, p = 0.16). However,
quality and flow measurements was analyzed (Supporting this is shown in Figure 3b. A significant negative correlation
Information). The analysis revealed significant seasonal was identified between SP1_N O and influent C/N ratio (r =
2
9521 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 6 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
Figure 4. Dynamics and scope-based analysis of GHG emissions by
carbonsourceregulationstrategiesduringhighemissionperiods.(a)
Dynamic simulation of GHG emissions over a year. Scope-based
analysis of GHGemissionsduringPeriods I(b)and II(c).
Figure3.Dynamicsofscope-basedGHGemissionsandcorrelations illustrates the temporal dynamics of total GHG emissions
analysisidentifyingthekeyinfluencingfactors.(a)Monthlydynamics
acrossallfourstrategies(base,AD,SF,andACSR)overthe1
of scope-based GHG emissions and C/N over one year; (b)
year-long study period. The time series reveals distinct
correlations between influent characteristics and scope-based GHG
emission patterns between Period I (characterized by low C/
emissions. SPrefersto scope.
N ratios) and Period II (characterized by high C/N ratios).
The ACSR strategy consistently maintained lower emission
−0.832,p<0.001).Thisresulthighlightsthecriticalregulatory levels throughout both periods, demonstrating its adaptability
role of the influent C/N ratio in N O production.39 The to varying influent conditions. Notable emission peaks
2
observed negative correlation may be attributed to increased occurred around day 150 and day 225, corresponding to
carbon availability, enhancing the denitrification process, significant shifts in influent C/N ratios, highlighting the
thereby reducing N O emissions. N O can be emitted from importance of carbon source regulation for GHG mitigation.
2 2
WWTPs as a byproduct of ammonium oxidation and as the Specifically, Figure 4c highlights that the AD strategy
last intermediate in the stepwise reduction of nitrate to significantly reduces GHG emissions, yielding the lowest
nitrogen by denitrifying organisms. Conditions such as a low emissions during Period II among all strategies examined.
C/Nratioorprolongeduse ofrecalcitrantcarbonsources can Compared with the base strategy, the AD strategy achieved a
increase the likelihood of N O accumulation and emission in notable reduction in total GHG emissions by approximately
2
denitrification systems.40 A potential strategy to mitigate N O 29.2%. This includes a 51.2% reduction in emissions from
2
emissions would be to enhance the activity of N O reductase sludge processing (SP3_SLUDGE) and a 57.7% reduction in
2
in the denitrifying microbial community.41 Figure 3b also energy-relatedemissions(SP2_ENERGY).Conversely,during
illustrates a significant positive correlation between PeriodI,theADstrategyexhibitedamarginalincreaseintotal
SP3_SLUDGE and various influent parameters, specifically GHG emissions by 0.2% relative to that of the base strategy.
COD, TP, and the C/N ratio. This result suggests that an This increase was primarily due to a 27.3% rise in N O
2
increase in carbon sources in the influent promotes the emissions (SP1_N O) (Figure 4b). These dynamics highlight
2
production of excess sludge.42 In summary, the elevated levels the AD strategy’s effectiveness under conditions of high C/N
of GHG emissions during different periods are attributed to ratios, with potential mechanisms illustrated in Figure S12,
distinct carbon-related mechanisms. Under low C/N con- showing that approximately 33.1% of influent COD was
ditions, carbon limitation leads to increased N O emissions recoveredasCH .Thisconversionfacilitatessignificantenergy
2 4
through incomplete denitrification. Under high C/N con- savingsandreducessludgewaste,thoughitraisesthenitrogen
ditions, increased carbon availability promotes excess sludge content in the recirculation liquor from 4.3% in the base
production and associated disposal emissions. strategy to 16.4% (Figure S13), which exacerbates N O
2
3.3. Dynamic Simulations and Comparison of emissions under lower C/N ratios.22
Mitigation Strategies. 3.3.1. Results of GHG Emissions AsillustratedinFigure4b,theSFstrategydemonstratedthe
across Different Strategies. Figure 4a−c demonstrates the lowest GHG emissions during Period I among the tested
effectiveness of a plant-wide model in assessing GHG strategies. It achieved an overall reduction in GHG emissions
emissions under three different carbon source regulation by about 17.9%, with a substantial 56.3% reduction in
strategies in comparison with the base strategy. Figure 4a SP1_N O. In Period II, the SF strategy saw a modest overall
2
9522 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 7 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
Table 1. Performance Evaluation Criteria for Each Carbon Source Regulation Strategy (n = 8761)
base AD SF ACSR
SP1_CH 262.9±150.7 5950.0±3536.0 1044.3±536.0 4655.5±4388.4
4
SP1_NO 40962.6±24795.8 56234.9±34021.8 27047.8±17459.5 34850.7±14313.8
2
SP2_ENERGY 50658.3±5637.2 32835.6±8978.6 54310.9±6378.1 39386.9±12244.5
SP3_CHEM 12221.8±1824.9 11739.3±1894.0 24137.4±2132.9 17516.2±5858.2
SP3_SLUDGE 44798.3±23296.3 24112.5±10281.3 30263.0±12143.0 25393.0±9710.8
totalGHGemissions 148903.9±26573.2 130872.3±31164.0 148585.1±24540.2 121802.2±19227.2
COD 15.9±3.3 15.8±3.3 14.9±3.3 14.9±3.3
TN 10.0±1.6 11.7±2.0 11.7±2.4 11.8±1.8
NH+ 0.3±0.1 0.3±0.1 0.3±0.1 0.3±0.1
4
TP 0.1±0.0 0.3±0.1 0.1±0.0 0.3±0.1
WLa 0.7±0.1 0.8±0.2 0.8±0.2 0.9±0.2
MLSS 3362.4±283.0 3087.8±343.1 3724.7±427.0 3375.0±339.1
MLVSS/MLSS 0.5±0.1 0.5±0.1 0.6±0.1 0.5±0.1
XBIO/XCOD 0.8±0.0 0.8±0.0 0.8±0.0 0.8±0.0
aWLis the maximumvalue of theratio betweeneach waterqualityparameterand the correspondingvalue of the Class1A standard.
GHG reduction of 5.5%. This period also witnessed a 39.0% and R were systematically varied between 0 and 1. An R
s inf
decrease in SP3_SLUDGE emissions but a 9.2% increase in value of 1 indicated complete bypass of PRIM, whereas an R
s
SP2_ENERGY emissions. This increased energy consumption value of 1 signified that all wasted sludge was routed through
can be attributed to two mechanisms: (1) higher COD loss the short-term fermentation reactor. Upon completion of the
through dissimilatory respiration (64% vs 52% in the base simulations,theminimumGHGemissionsforeachC/Nratio
strategy,FigureS12)duetoacceleratedVFAoxidationand(2) were determined while maintaining Class 1A effluent quality.
increased oxygen demand for nitrification resulting from Figure 5a presents the minimum GHG emissions attainable
nitrogen recycle loads. The SF strategy’s performance is under Class 1A effluent quality constraints for each carbon
primarily attributed to improved influent characteristics, such source regulation strategy across different influent C/N ratios.
as an enhanced C/N ratio and a higher proportion of easily The AD and ACSR strategies demonstrated consistently low
biodegradable carbon sources (Figure S12), which bolstered GHG emissions across the entire range of C/N ratios. This
biomassactivitywithinthebioreactor(Table1)andefficiently performance can be largely attributed to enhanced methane
mitigated N O emissions.43
2 production and subsequent energy recovery. In contrast, the
3.3.2. Results of the Adaptive Combined Strategy. The
SF strategy exhibited lower GHG emissions when the C/N
ACSR leverages the flexibility to switch between AD and SF
ratiowasbelow5.5,whichcanbeascribedtothereductionin
strategies based on the varying influent conditions. During
N O emissions. Despite the advantages of the AD strategy in
Period I, ACSR’s GHG emission reduction was slightly better 2
GHGmitigation,itseffluentqualitymettherequiredstandards
than SF, at a 5.7% total decrease, effectively utilizing the
only when the C/N ratio exceeded 6. Conversely, the ACSR
biodegradable carbon recovered from sludge to mitigate N O
2 strategy was capable of achieving the effluent standards under
emissions under low C/N conditions. In comparison with the
lower C/N conditions (C/N ratios below 5.75). Figure 5b−e
base strategy, this period saw SF achieve a 13.2% decrease in
illustrates the flow regulation patterns for each strategy at the
total GHG emissions, with a significant 40.1% reduction in
minimum GHG emission levels. For the base strategy, the
SP1_N O. During Period II, ACSR’s performance closely
2 influent predominantly bypassed PRIM across the studied C/
matched that of the AD strategy, with only a 0.9% higher
Nratios.Incontrast,theAD,SF,andACSRstrategiesshowed
emission rate, but achieved substantial reductions in both
a gradual transition from bypassing to full utilization of PRIM
SP2_ENERGY and SP3_SLUDGE. Although not recording
as the C/N ratio increased. Notably, the ACSR strategy
the lowest emissions in individual categories, ACSR demon-
involved the redirection of a portion of the sludge toward
stratedthemostconsistentoverallGHGreductionthroughout
short-termfermentationforVFArecoverywhentheC/Nratio
the entire simulation, achieving an approximate 18.2%
was below 6.
reduction in total emissions compared to the base strategy
Previous studies have shown that enhancing the sedimenta-
(Table 1). These results underscore the importance of a
tion efficiency of particulate carbon in the primary
flexible carbon source allocation strategy, informed by the
sedimentation tank can lead to increased energy recovery.44,45
influent carbon content, in maximizing GHG emission
reduction. For instance, chemically enhanced primary treatment can
3.4. Effect of Influent C/N Ratios on GHG Emissions. support nutrient removal and anaerobic digestion by
This section evaluates the influence of influent C/N ratios on concentrating sludge, thereby achieving substantial energy
three proposed carbon source regulation strategies alongside recovery while maintaining high effluent quality.46 These
the base strategy. Steady-state simulations were conducted by findings demonstrate that flexible carbon source regulation
varying three parameters: influent C/N ratio, influent strategies can effectively balance effluent quality against GHG
distribution ratios (R ), and sludge distribution ratios (R, emissions under variable influent C/N conditions. This
inf s
applicableonlyfortheACSRstrategy).Theadjustmentofthe balance is crucial for optimizing GHG mitigation while
influent C/N ratio was achieved by fixing the influent TN ensuringregulatorycompliancewitheffluentqualitystandards,
concentration at 40 mg-N/L while varying the influent COD offering the dual benefit of environmental protection and
(200−400mg/L)toachievethedesiredC/Nratios.BothR resource recovery in wastewater treatment operations.
inf
9523 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 8 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
seasonal variations by dynamically redistributing primary
sludge between AD and SF based on real-time C/N
monitoring, prioritizing SF, potentially coupled with mild
pretreatment, during low C/N periods to provide readily
available carbon for denitrification, while managing nutrient
release.
3.5. Environmental Implications. Achieving net-zero
GHG emissions in WWTPs is a significant challenge that
requires the development of integrated mitigation strategies.
GHGemissionsfromWWTPsinvolvemultiplescopes,making
them challenging to quantify, with complex interactions and
emissionstransfersoccurringacrossthesescopesandorganiza-
tional boundaries.51 These complexities make the implemen-
tation of comprehensive, system-wide mitigation strategies
particularlychallenging.Historically,researchfocusedonGHG
emission reduction within WWTPs has primarily targeted
optimizing specific unit processes, such as aeration control,20
improving pumping efficiency,52 or enhancing nutrient
recovery.22 While these approaches contribute to reductions
in GHG emissions, they often fall short of addressing the
interconnected emissions across the entire system. Moreover,
many studies have targeted GHG emissions within a specific
scope,suchasSP1_N Othroughaerationcontrol53orexternal
2
carbon source dosing,54 or SP2_ENERGY through renewable
energy integration.55
Our study shifts this paradigm by focusing on the
optimization of carbon source regulation from the perspective
of influent carbon source allocation, recovery, and utilization,
integratingbothwaterandsludgelines.Theproposedstrategy
considers GHG emissions comprehensively across SP1_N O,
2
Figure 5. (a) Minimum GHG emissions achievable under Class 1A SP2_ENERGY, and SP3_SLUDGE, offering a promising
effluentqualityconstraintsforeachcarbonsourceregulationstrategy pathway toward a more integrated and systemic reduction of
acrossvaryinginfluentC/Nratios.Influentdistributionratios(R inf)at GHG emissions. By elucidating the relationship between
different influent C/N ratios corresponding to the minimum GHG
influent carbon sources and the scope and overall quantity of
emissionfor(b)base,(c)AD,and(d)SFstrategy.(e)Relationship
GHG emissions from WWTPs, our findings reveal substantial
between R and sludge distribution ratios (R) at different influent
inf s potential for plant-wide GHG reduction through strategic
C/N ratios corresponding to the minimum GHG emissions for the
ACSR strategy. In (a−d), the hollow points and in (e), the gray management of influent carbon sources.
spheresrepresentsimulatedconditionswheretheeffluentqualitydoes This work’s limitations include its primary data collection
notmeetthe Class1A standard atthis C/Nlevel. from specific seasons (summer and winter), which does not
fully capture the impact of year-round climatic variations on
The seasonal variations in influent COD fractionation GHG emissions. Future research should be conducted over
significantlyimpacttheACSRstrategyimplementation.During longertimeframestocapturethedynamicsofGHGemissions
high C/N periods, the abundant particulate organic matter undervaryingseasonalconditions.Alimitationintheemission
(X : 41%) is ideally suited for AD processes, which benefit measurement methodology should be noted as direct GHG
S
from extended retention times, allowing complete conversion measurements were confined to the aeration tank. Although
of these slowly biodegradable substrates to methane. For plant-wide emissions were assessed through model-based
optimizingADperformanceundertheseconditions,enhanced approaches, future studies employing multiple measurement
primaryclarification(e.g.,polymeraddition)couldincreasethe techniques across all treatment units are needed to validate
capture of particulate organics, maximizing biogas production. model predictions and establish comprehensive emission
Conversely,duringlowC/Nperiods,thechallengebecomes factors.
2-fold:addressingthereducedavailabilityofparticulateorganic The applicability of ACSR strategies varies across WWTP
matter while minimizing nitrogen release during sludge configurations and influent characteristics. While conventional
processing. For these conditions, the SF process must be activated sludge processes can readily implement ACSR
carefully optimized to balance VFA production against through existing infrastructure modifications, MBR systems
potentialnutrientrelease.Thisinvolvescontrollingoperational require additional consideration of membrane fouling
parameters (pH, HRT, temperature) and potentially employ- potential. Industrial wastewaters with a high organic content
ingmildpretreatmentmethods(e.g.,low-temperaturethermal mayfavorAD-focusedstrategies,whilemunicipalsystemswith
hydrolysis,biosurfactants,andhigh-speedhydro-cyclone).47−50 lower C/N ratios may benefit more from SF implementation.
Thesepretreatmentscanselectivelyextractcarbonsourceslike Success factors include (1) flexible infrastructure allowing
EPS for fermentation into VFAs while minimizing the release carbon source redirection, (2) robust monitoring systems for
of intracellular nitrogen and phosphorus, thus improving key process parameters, (3) adequate buffer capacity for
substrate quality and mitigating internal nutrient loads and managing variability, and (4) process-specific modifications
potential N O emissions. The ACSR strategy addresses these based on treatment configuration. Future research should
2
9524 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 9 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
systematically evaluate the ACSR performance across diverse Supporting Information Figure S19 and Table S34). This
WWTP configurations and influent compositions to develop enhanced stability under dynamic conditions further supports
configuration-specific implementation guidelines. Additionally, the viability of ACSR for managing the inherent variability of
while this studyhas investigated theGHGreduction potential full-scale wastewater treatment operations, while consistently
of carbon source regulation strategies, further assessments mitigating GHG emissions. The future evolution of ACSR
regarding their economic feasibility and energy efficiency are strategies will benefit from integration with emerging
requiredtoensurewidespreadadoptioninlarge-scaleWWTPs.
technologies.AI-drivenoptimizationusingdeepreinforcement
Life-cycle assessment reveals that while the AD strategy
learning can continuously adapt carbon allocation based on
demonstrates the lowest overall environmental impact (30.2
historical performance data. Advanced sensor networks
mPt), the ACSR strategy emerges as the most balanced
incorporating novel N O, CH , and VFA sensors with
approach, achieving significant reductions in key impact 2 4
automatic drift correction can provide high-resolution spatial
categories while maintaining minimal impacts on other
and temporal monitoring. Hybrid digital twin models
environmental indicators. This balanced environmental per-
combining physics-based and data-driven approaches enable
formance, combined with superior economic returns (NPV: +
real-time optimization and scenario analysis. These techno-
€34.9 M relative to the base strategy) and operational
logical advances will enhance ACSR’s capability to achieve
flexibility, positions ACSR as a particularly promising strategy
forsustainablewastewatertreatmentimplementation.Regional consistentGHGreductionwhilemaintainingrobusttreatment
analysis of 5,155 WWTPs across China demonstrates that performance under varying conditions. Furthermore, future
influent characteristics vary significantly with local industrial refinements of the ACSR strategy should include the
structure, urbanization level, and economic development optimization of primary treatment processes under varying
(Table S40). The proposed ACSR strategy shows promise in C/N conditions. During high C/N periods, polymer addition
adapting to these regional variations through dynamic in primary clarification could enhance the capture of
adjustment of carbon source allocation based on influent C/ particulate organics for improved methane production in AD.
N ratios while maintaining treatment efficiency and meeting During low C/N periods, selective primary treatment
effluent quality standards (Supporting Information). This optimization should focus on balancing particulate matter
flexibilityisparticularlyvaluablegiventhesubstantialvariations capture for VFA production against minimizing nitrogen
in influent characteristics observed across different regions of
release during subsequent fermentation. This might involve
China.
adjusting polymer types and dosages, optimizing hydraulic
Moreover, carbon source regulation strategies should be
retention times, or implementing selective capture technolo-
systematically integrated with advanced process control and
giesthatpreferentiallyremovecarbonaceousparticulateswhile
modeling frameworks, including reinforcement learning
minimizing nitrogen-rich biomass capture. Integration with
algorithms56 and hybrid modeling approaches,57 to facilitate
mild sludge pretreatment methods prior to SF should also be
more effective GHG emission mitigation. In addition to
exploredtomaximizetheVFAyieldwhilecontrollingnutrient
leveraging advanced technologies, it is crucial to optimize the
release. Such targeted primary sludge management would
useofbufferingcapacitieswithinWWTPfacilities(e.g.,PRIM,
further enhance the adaptability of the ACSR strategy across
buffer tanks) to augment carbon source modulation and
storage potential, thereby ensuring robust responses to abrupt seasonalvariationsininfluentcharacteristics.Furthermore,the
variations in influent water quality. Implementation of ACSR optimization of the ACSR strategy could extend beyond bulk
strategiesinexistingWWTPsrequires carefulconsiderationof C/N ratio control to consider the specific composition of
both infrastructure modifications and monitoring systems. VFAs produced during a short fermentation. Different
Infrastructure challenges include the installation of AD/SF microbial guilds involved in nutrient removal exhibit distinct
fermentation tanks, CHP units, flow distribution devices, and preferences and metabolic efficiencies for the various VFAs.
carbonsourcebuffertanks. Additionally,successfulimplemen- For instance, diverse heterotrophic denitrifiers utilize VFAs as
tation depends on comprehensive monitoring systems for electron donors, with acetate often considered highly
influent characteristics, suspended solids, settling efficiency, efficient,58−60whilePAOclades(Accumulibacter,Tetrasphaera)
and VFA content. While these modifications represent and denitrifying PAOs (Dechloromonas) also show varying
significant investments, they can be implemented gradually specificities for substrates like acetate, propionate, or even
through planned upgrade cycles to manage costs while amino acids.61−63 Future refinements of ACSR could involve
maintaining operational stability. The dynamic operation of
dynamically adjusting SF operational parameters to tailor the
ACSR is enabled by a three-tiered automation architecture
VFA profile, thereby optimizing substrate availability for the
integrating real-time monitoring, advanced process control,
dominant microbial populations under the prevailing con-
and optimization systems. This infrastructure allows ACSR to
ditions. This substrate-specific carbon allocation, guided by
respond to influent variations within 15−30 min, maintaining
advanced monitoring and control, represents a promising
stableperformanceunderdynamicconditionswhileoptimizing
avenue for further enhancing the integrated performance of
both nutrient removal and GHG mitigation. Furthermore, the
ACSR in simultaneous GHG mitigationand nutrient removal.
practical implementation of ACSR requires the consideration
This study underscores the potential for achieving net-zero
ofoperationalrobustness.Toevaluatethis,additionaldynamic
simulations were conducted to assess system response to GHG emissions in WWTPs through an optimized carbon
transient shock loads (5 h duration, +25% influent COD or source allocation. By integration of advanced process control
TN). The ACSR strategy demonstrated superior resilience and modeling frameworks, such as reinforcement learning
compared to base, AD, and SF strategies, exhibiting smaller algorithms and hybrid modeling approaches, with systematic
deviations in effluent quality and GHG emissions and strategy implementation, WWTPs can attain net-zero
achieving significantly faster recovery times (details in emissions in a practical and systematic manner.
9525 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528

--- Page 10 ---
Environmental Science & Technology pubs.acs.org/est Article
■ ■
ASSOCIATED CONTENT ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
* sı Supporting Information We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at National Key R&D Program of China (No.
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704. 2023YFC3207101) and Shenzhen Science and Technology
WWTP characteristics and operation; GHG measure- Program (Grant Nos. JCYJ20241202123900001,
ment and monitoring methods; data reconciliation KCXFZ20211020163404007, KQTD20190929172630447).
procedures; long-term influent data analysis; compre- ■
hensive model kinetics, parameters, and sensitivity NOMENCLATURE
analysis; carbon source regulation strategy details and
AAO anaerobic−anoxic−aerobic
logic; simulation results for nutrient/COD fluxes, GHG
ACSR adaptive carbon source regulation
emissions,andshockloadresponses;energybalance;life
AD anaerobic digestion
cycle assessment and cost-benefit analysis; and pre-
AER aerobic zone
dictive control feasibility assessment (PDF)
ANA anaerobic zone
■
ANOVA analysis of variance
AUTHOR INFORMATION
ANOX anoxic zone
Corresponding Authors C/N carbon-to-nitrogen ratio
Ai-JieWang−StateKeyLaboratoryofUrbanWaterResource CH methane
4
andEnvironment,SchoolofEnvironment,HarbinInstituteof CHP combined heat and power
Technology, Harbin 150090, China; School of Civil and COD chemical oxygen demand
Environmental Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology DEW dewatering
Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, China; orcid.org/0009- DO dissolved oxygen
0001-4829-2538; Email: waj0578@hit.edu.cn EFF final effluent
Hong-Cheng Wang − State Key Laboratory of Urban Water FA free ammonia
Resource and Environment, School of Environment, Harbin FTIR Fourier transform infrared
Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China; School of GHG greenhouse gas
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Harbin Institute of GWP global warming potential
Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, China; HRT hydraulic retention time
orcid.org/0000-0002-6555-1722; LCA life cycle assessment
Email: wanghongcheng@hit.edu.cn N O nitrous oxide
2
NPV net present value
Authors
R influent distribution ratio
Yun-Peng Song − State Key Laboratory of Urban Water inf
R sludge distribution ratio
Resource and Environment, School of Environment, Harbin S
SumoSlang SUMO simulation language
Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China; School of
WWTP wastewater treatment plant
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Harbin Institute of
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, China
MAPE mean absolute percentage error
Li-Li Du − Central Plains Environmental Protection Co.,
MLSS mixed liquor suspended solids
LCD., Zhengzhou 450000, China
NaClO sodium hypochlorite
Bao-Gui Wang − Central Plains Environmental Protection
NaOH sodium hydroxide
Co., LCD., Zhengzhou 450000, China NH + ammonium
Ling-Min Zhang − Central Plains Environmental Protection NO4 − nitrate
Co., LCD., Zhengzhou 450000, China 3
PAM polyacrylamide
Hong-Yong Lin − Central Plains Environmental Protection PO − phosphate
Co., LCD., Zhengzhou 450000, China 4
PRIM primary clarification
Fang Ma − State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource
RSF relative sensitivity function
andEnvironment,SchoolofEnvironment,HarbinInstituteof
SCOD soluble chemical oxygen demand
Technology, Harbin 150090, China; orcid.org/0000-
SEC secondary clarifier
0002-8849-0803
SF short fermentation
YuBai−UnicomDigitalTechnologyCo.Ltd.,Beijing100032,
SP1_CH Scope 1 methane emissions
China 4
SP1_N O Scope 1 nitrous oxide emissions
Nan-QiRen−StateKeyLaboratoryofUrbanWaterResource 2
SP2_ENERGY Scope 2 energy-related emissions
andEnvironment,SchoolofEnvironment,HarbinInstituteof
SP3_CHEM Scope 3 chemical-related emissions
Technology, Harbin 150090, China; School of Civil and
SP3_SLUDGE Scope 3 sludge-related emissions
Environmental Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
TCOD total chemical oxygen demand
Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, China
THK thickening
Complete contact information is available at: TN total nitrogen
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704 TP total phosphate
TSS total suspended solids
Author Contributions VFA volatile fatty acid
⊥Y.-P.S. and L.L.D. contributed equally to this work. VSS volatile suspended solids
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
9526 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c12704
Environ.Sci.Technol.2025,59,9517−9528